1. “Tell us the tale,” they say to me. “Tell us of the Great War!” At a town ballad, at the great yajña, at every corner where they bump into me, they want me to sing of events grim and dark. What do I tell them? That there was nothing Great in the War, there never is? “But you are the sūta!” I imagine they would protest. “Who will tell us, if not you?”
2. Yes, a sūta I am. Singer of yore, town to town, village to village. But once I was a soldier, and I have seen too much of death up close to want to relive it, let alone immortalize it in gīta, gāthā or chanda. I am alive on the debt of men greater than me, friends and brothers who died while I lived. It is them I should be with. It is with them I should be singing immortal songs, rejoicing in soma and glorious company of the Devas. 
3. I wonder at times, what would life have been like had I never left my village, all those decades ago? Had never answered the chieftain’s call, never let the rush of blood and battle consume my young mind. Now that foolish youth is no more, an old man left in his place, with part of me forever left there in the village. Among the cows and bird, canopies and grass. It could have been a happy life.
4. Even when empire came, when over the blood-soaked fields of the dead the people dragged stone and granite to build the great monument, I could have been a simple worker. Chisel and nail my weapon instead of blade and bow. My effort and body dedicated not to killing but to creating. A simple life even that would have been, the hardships never coming to haunt the mind. But those are the routes never taken, and now I live with my past as we all must. 
5. So I fulfill my karma, a sūta’s karma. Town to town I sing of the Great War, telling them not of the killers and marauders but of the heroes and bravery. Memory does decay more and more, so I am forced to fill gaps with what I think is the best estimation of truth. And I am forced to lie. For how do you tell the people, that some among their ancestors were adhārmika? How do you tell a tribe, that its great forebear sought chaos not order, chased death not life? I make heroes of them all, I lie so they may live proud and united today. This also is my karma. A sūta’s karma. Ours is the duty to keep bound the great nation that the War knit together. Ours is the duty to sing of the unities, not the divisions. 
6. I begin at him, that young child, the harbinger of a great future though his origins may not have foretold it. Born in the forest, raised by the ascetics, son to a proud and fierce mother. Who ascended to glory and lineage. Denied what was rightfully his, by his own kinsmen, his blood doubted by his own father before he proved his claim. Who later disowned his own sons and established a legacy built on dharma, not on blood-right. Who gives to my land its great name. Bharata, the son of Śakuntalā and Duṣyanta. Cakravartin. The forebear to our heroes.
7. Bharata, who as a young man raised no suspicions of his grand ambitions- more his mother’s gentle son than his father’s fierce firstborn. His hair braided with flower and color, his pursuits given to poem and song. Did anyone know it back then? Did a great rshi who looked into his eyes see the determined flame of agni within him? Or was it later, when the gentle chin turned to hard rock, the lean chest swelled with power and muscle- that they understood it was a great ruler they faced?
8. Here in my tent, on this cold night, my mind goes to Bharata’s great campaign. Nay. His great pilgrimage. Of the long years he bore and suffered with perseverance, building his strength. I sing to the people of him, adding to his legend, exalting him above all that preceded and succeeded him. I don’t tell the people that his was the first bloody war of conquest. Of avoidable death and killing. Of unhindered ambition, with unchecked power. It is of Bharata’s dharma the people must learn. Not of a dead man’s ego and hunger for power. What good would spreading such stories do? They would only raise more men of ego. More ambition. More killing. I cannot stand any more killing. I have borne my share.
9. Now my tale too begins near where his began. At a hard town nestled into the Himālayan foothills- Plākṣa. A town where history went so far back, it faded into myth. The primal mahaṛṣi Atri once walked these valleys, and in one of the many caves here he gained his dṛṣṭi. Here the strong, dangerous Gaṅgā of the mountains turned a gentle, life-giving river headed to the plains. Here Bharata declared himself undisputed Pūru heir, lord to the five rivers, the Yamunā, and all in between. Of course, my own tale begins many generations after him. With one of the many proud descendants of Bharata. But I sing of him last, for he is the greatest of heroes. It is of the others I sing first. And this is how the people like it too. 
10. Do we really remember our younger selves? Or does an old man more conjure a fantasy? The fading image of my memory, is it real? Or is it an image blended with the thousands of faces of my youth? With the face of my brothers and foes alike? Do I stare at myself, in my mind’s eye? Or do I stare at someone whose life I took? Ah, perhaps none of that matters. I see the image of young, naive Bhāratīya. All too willing to answer his chief’s call. All too willing to march into battle, as if it was a day’s hunt he ventured to. Not a horror lasting years. And years. 
11. But how strong can memories of childhood embed into the mind. Our clan-head’s face I remember vividly, better than I remember my own face. Those determined eyes, glazed not a bit by his age. The wrinkles on his face testifying to the number of seasons he had seen. A man of noble conduct and selfless leadership. Content with his small clan, but ever-ready to lend hands to build the civilization. He was the first to answer the chieftain’s call. The first to declare- “We stand with you!” We would have followed him anywhere. Indeed, many of us did follow him, to death. Puroḍā, he was named. Devoted to Dharma and Bhārata. The song of the Great War is a ballad of ten regents. Puroḍā was the first of them. 
12. From the gentle lap of river and mountain, we shift to the harsh landscape of cave and cavern. To people of different ways, ways that would not be palatable to those who dwell within rule and order. In the early years of battle I learnt that those who appeared āsurika to us often just had their own ways. They did not necessarily live by the same Dharma, but they lived in Dhārmikata nonetheless. It was the first of many lessons that would kill the naive fool within me. They fought hard, and they fought to the last man. And they were led from the front by their valiant leader- Pramaganda. We called them Kīkaṭas, and to them belonged the deep mountains as far as the eye could go. A brutal stand they put up, and many of my friends fell to their blades. Too many. 
13. There is only one truth about war- it is never predictable. I remember the relief that washed over us when the Kīkaṭas were finally bested. Hah! Still half as naive as we once were, we thought we had seen the worst of it. It would prove to be a fatal error. There were no people in Bhārata that did not defend their lands and lives with valor that would make their ancestors proud. They all did, and they were all children of the land, after all. The Śimyus, those cursed and brave men, how their elephants crushed our bones, and their war-cries our spirits. We would have almost lost it all. I cannot frequent the Śatadru’s riverbank anymore, for doing so would bring back all the horror. And I am too old to relive it. 
14. Their capital was the first true city I had ever seen. A proper vasati that contained merchants from foreign lands, farmers with hardened hands, and seers with keen dṛṣṭis, all. To see Madra’s rising walls, its fortified complexes, and the great Temple of Devi at its center, anyone would wonder- why did they not wage their defence here, inside its protection? Why did they meet us in the open fields? I learnt another lesson that day, when our clan-head said to us- “Stay within your walls, and the enemy will never stop coming for you. March out and face them in their lands- that is when they will understand.” 
15. One among us, I forget his name, pointed out- “the Śimyus lost all the same.” ”Aye, they did,” said Puroḍā. “But here stands their city. Here live their people, blessed by their warriors’ sacrifice. If we had to break into this city, if a long siege preceded our entry. Would honour temper our violence then? Would woman and child go untouched by the blood lust of a warrior army?” The silence gave its own answer. The Śimyu sacrifice was a noble sacrifice. So noble, we do not even know who led them. He died in the anonymity of cold battle, like his men. His brothers. He followed the kṣatra dharma. 
16. We spent 2 seasons at Madra, resting our spirit and building our strength again. The chieftain called upon allies old and new, and month by month our ranks increased till we were a force larger than ever before. Madra grew too, the Temple of Devi flourished, and for a moment one could have believed that the good times had come. That the war was over. One would have been a fool to believe so, of course. 
17. And though there were many years ahead of me, a fool I was no longer. I used the time to immerse myself in Dharma. I cultivated a relationship with Indra, and awakened to Agni within me. Once a simple villager, turned young soldier, I was then a wisened sādhaka. But I kept my body strong, my mind stronger still. I slept with blade by my side, knowing that the darkness of war would cast its shadow any day. It was the last time I would experience peace, for a long time to come. What I did not know was that horrors worse than we had ever seen were yet to come. The worse was yet to come. 
18. And it makes complete sense in hindsight- all that time we took to regroup, rearm and prepare- was the same opportunity to those who stood against us. Tribes of the five rivers, their frames built with hard muscle and hearts steeled to battle as a way of life. It was their dharma- fight, kill, or die, but always strive towards greatness in the fields of war. Ordinary men died in battle, these tribes lived to find such a death.  Pāktha, Bhalāna, Ālina, Śighra- there were many sub-clans among them, each as blood-thirsty as the other. They fought brutally even among themselves, and over the generations thus emerged a people cultivated for war. 
19. Together, when standing against us, they were Āsura incarnate. Men whose bravery had inspired me in previous battles, I then saw lose their courage when facing these tribes.  It is here, that I sing the first paean to our chieftain. He, who put spirit in our hearts whenever we needed it. Who was never short of spirit himself. He, who even these tribes eventually came to fear. 
20. It is said that many years he spent in cold solitude, our chieftain. Learning to survive on his own against the elements and wild animals alike. Training his mind to be firm, focussed, survivalist. This being a mandatory rite of passage for all Bhāratas of direct descent from the great forebear. The Bhārata that did not return from this rite, was a Bhārata who was never meant to rise to position at all. 
21. It was not the only test of mettle. The returned Bhārata had to then prove to his men he was a leader worth following, a man competent enough to command their loyalty. Of all the tales I sing of the Great War and its heroes, the tale of our chieftain’s great combat with the elephant I sing with delight. Even today I can bring spirit to my heart. It can assure me that all will be well. No wonder it gets the reactions it does, I inflect it with the best meter and syllable I can put together. For a long time I have been singing these songs, and I know my audiences well by now. The ballads are fully rehearsed, the cadence a deft art I consider myself adept on. From this great hero, the chieftain, I move to his greatest foes. The eternal other to the one.
22. A great and no less legendary tribe are they, the Ānavas. Kindred tribe in fact to the the Bhāratas, though those bonds had decayed long before the Great War. And the brothers that led them, born in the line of Sivi Ausinara the ancient cakravartin- Kavaṣa and Bheda. Men who could send a chill down your spine, just by staring at you. Their gaze blank and beastly at the same time. A smile that was not quite a smile always resting on their lips. They turned the rituals upside down. They contorted the ways, doing them in the opposite manner as if to spite us by sheer defilement. They inverted their speech, mocking our reverence for śabda. They did not worship Agni, they coveted it. And the might of the vast and widespread Ānava clans was under their thumbs. 
23. It was Bheda we took on first, the battle we waged along the Yamunā turned its waters deep red- the color not of death but of misery and pain and wretchedness. The younger one, Kavaṣa. He was to cause Bharata deaths for many more years yet.
24. And behind them were men who turned the very earth black when they walked over it. A dark power circled around them and rested on their shoulders. The Dasyu priests. Seers and sorcerers, twisters of the fire. In the early days of our campaigns against the Ānavas, when the Dasyu seers were still strange and mysterious to our minds, a single Dasyu standing on the hill caused greater fear in our ranks than did even a thousand Ānava warriors. I have seen them up close, walked among their cursed alleys. I have seen the Āsurika glint in their eyes, a perverted vision of the sacred flame. They scorned Indra, subverted the very idea of Varuṇa, and spewed poison-tongued words for our totemic seers, the Āṅgirasas. Dark times they were for Bhārata, when hundreds of Dasyus roamed and poisoned freely. Dark the land still is through the presence of the rare few who never left. I sing warnings to the people in my ballads. “Stay away from them!” 
25. It is by this point in my songs that the crowds usually get restless, the talk of dark and cruel men beginning to cause unrest. So I transport them elsewhere, to a part of the story that begins at lands far away, near the southern oceans. To the humble villages of friends and aides who, even from the far shores, responded to our chieftain’s call when he sent it out. The Turvaśas, who we in the north even today consider our kinsmen and brothers, descended of the same blood as us, our shared ancestry running deep into the past.  A kind and humble people, a reassuring aura to their very name. I sing of their green pastures near the coastlines, of the long trees native to their lands and alien to the north, of the rugged hills shorter by a margin to the Himālaya, but casting a protective wall for them all the same.  It is from there that two brothers once set out, many years before the Great War began. Sons of the Devas Mitra and Varuṇa, legend preceding them. The younger brother was to be our salvation.