---
title: two
id: 2
---

“This isn’t it,” Grtsamada said dejectedly.

The merchant was offended. “I’ve been trading this stuff for many years! You think you can ascertain the quality just by looking at it?”

“It’s not about the quality. This isn’t even Soma to begin with.”

Now the merchant looked positively shocked. “Are you out of your mind, man? This *is* the Soma bundle! These seeds are from far west, west even of Dasavarsha. And these reeds? You won’t find them growing along any river here.”

Grtsamada was out of patience. “Bless our pestle and mortar, oh Agni, for with these we press the sacred Soma,” he recited, “The prayers are very clear on what the plant is. Soma is a single plant with a leafless stalk. What you sell under its name is an absurd imitation.”

The merchant was in no mood to barter with a misinformed customer. “Fine,” he said, pulling a cover back over the seeds and reeds. “Go find your stalk then, stop wasting my time.”

Grtsamada moved on, disappointed by his lack of success in finding a trader who stocked the actual Soma. Aristanemi followed, enjoying his cousin’s frustration. The markets of Kashi were busy this early in the day, with foreign traders looking to sell the last of their wares before departing the city. They filled the narrow lanes with their calls, broken Sanskrit and foreign tongues mixed together in a strange prakrit that could only be found here. Priests were just emerging from their morning prayers, passing prasad around and spreading the scent of incense in the air.

“You’re too dogmatic in your interpretation, brother,” Aristanemi commented, covering his face to keep the incense smoke out.

“Ruddy, brown, leafless- the hymns leave no room for interpretation,” Grtsamada said, inspecting the many herbs, leaves and sprigs traders had laid out in their stalls. 

“The prayers *you *know leave no room for interpretation,” Aristanemi corrected. “There could be other prayers with other descriptions. There could more than one Soma.”

“Then one of them would be the original, and the rest later substitutes.”

“Well, what are you going to do when you find it?”

“I’m going to consume it,” Grtsamada said without missing a beat. “Soma was clearly important to the ancient rshis. I want to share that experience.”

“Well, then why don’t you try to discover it by experience and not appearance,” Aristanemi suggested. “That merchant back there is clearly convinced that he sells Soma. Take that and try it. See what you experience. Maybe the hymns remember the physical characteristics wrong.”

Grtsamada slowed down as he considered that. He’d been diligently compiling the Soma hymns for many months now, having finished doing so for Indra and Agni. These were small steps in his larger project, and in the Soma hymns he’d hit a hurdle. The ancient hymns were deeply reverential of Soma, according it the status of deva equal to Indra and Agni. But the hymns held little meaning if he could not see, touch and experience Soma himself. He had no context for how to organise them, and in many cases even for how to understand them.

“But the hymns never mention that Soma is actually two plants,” he said.

Aristanemi did not share either the passion or the reverence Grtsamada held for the hymns. “Maybe they were deliberately misleading,” he said, shrugging his shoulders. “Maybe they wanted to preserve the knowledge within an exclusive set.”

“That’s absurd,” Grtsamada scoffed. “Why would maharshis like Vasishtha and Atri found rshi schools then? We know the hymns now because they passed them on.”

“Yes, but what about maharshi Kashyapa? He didn’t establish any schools, teach any disciples, did he? And most of the Soma hymns come from him, don’t they?”

Aristanemi had a point. Maharshi Kashyapa’s hymns were remembered because they were absorbed by the Vasishtha school, and he was an enigmatic enough figure for Aristanemi’s speculation to have some plausibility. “Should we try it then?” Grtsamada asked, mulling it over.

“Oh, not me!” Aristanemi said, making an exaggerated show of backing off. “This is your project, brother. And your experiments.”

Grtsamada smiled. “Yes, and you’re just the curious observer, aren’t you? Goading me on and making notes on the sidelines.”

“Ganjika and madhu are good enough for me. I know some of the Soma hymns too, and I’m not keen on trying anything that sounds like that. Now come, do you want to purchase that trader’s Soma or not?”

“Let’s do it,” Grtsamada said, feeling more courageous than usual. Aristanemi’s original suggestion was valid after all- one way for Grtsamada to find and identify Soma was by trying the many plants being traded under its name. 

The merchant was excited to see them return. “A wise decision,” he declared, bringing out his ‘Soma bundle’ as they approached. “Here, one batch should keep you happy for half a year.” He added with a wink- “Provided your usage is ritual and not recreational.”

“And this really is Soma?” Grtsamada asked, suspicion lurking in his tone.

The merchant sighed. “I told you to stop wasting my time if you don’t want to buy.”

“We do, we do,” Aristanemi assuaged. “We just want to learn more about it. Can you tell us what the seeds and reeds are?”

The merchant’s expression changed, a twinkle coming into his eyes. “Ah, why didn’t you just say that? See, these seeds here are called haoma. Further west, the plant they seed is called harmala. It doesn’t grow much here, but you might know it as somalata? No? I thought so. These reeds look common enough, but you won’t find them growing anywhere along the Ganga. They grow only in Dasavarsha, where the rivers never meet the sea. Soma is made from mixing the crushed seeds into juice pressed from the reeds. Take either without the other and you’ll feel no effect.”

“Now that is intriguing,” Grtsamada admitted. “The hymns do say Soma is pressed from the stalks. Do we press these reeds in pestle and mortar?”

The merchant made a face and shrugged. “How does that matter? Do it however you like. Now, are you buying or not?”

They made the purchase, paying the man with the sort of riparian shells that were accepted as currency across Aryavarta. Then they made their way to the ghats, where the day’s many ferries, shuttles and boats had begun their activity. Across the width of the Ganga they could see islands scattered, big and small. Grtsamada had claimed one of them for himself years ago, building a wooden hermitage where he retreated to for his work. He could see the island now, though the hut was hidden behind a line of trees. In his twenties he usually swam across, but at thirty-five he found he didn’t have the same physical zeal. The boatmen, being locals, recognised Grtsamada and Aristanemi- calling out to extend their services. Grtsamada knew several of them personally, hailing the nearest one to take him to the island.

“Are you sure you don’t want to join?” He confirmed one last time.

“Quite sure,” Aristanemi said. “Soma is not my quest, brother.”

“No,” Grtsamada agreed, stepping into the boat. “Your quest is ganjika.”

“Wrong,” Aristanemi waved him off. “I have no quest, the ganjika’s just for the journey!”

It was a short row from Kashi’s main ghat to the island that housed Grtsamada’s hermitage. He returned to it with some anxiety, not knowing what to expect from making and consuming this Soma. But that the reed needed to be pressed gave him some comfort- it was in line with what the hymns described. Apprehension of the unknown rising inside him, Grtsamada took out his sacred pestle and mortar, made by his own obeisant hands years ago. He imagined if this really was the original Soma, visualising the great maharshis engaged in the same act as he was now- grinding the seeds with a pounding heart. 

The prayer came to him unbidden- *With my grinding stone raised high to press the juices out, oh Indra, drink the sacred droppings my mortar sheds. *

He carefully placed the crushed harmala powder aside, breaking the reeds into half and placing them in the mortar next. *The devas seek him who presses out the Soma; they desire not sleep; they punish sloth unweariedly. *

The juice extracted, Grtsamada mixed the powder into it and sat back to consider the moment. If this really was Soma, he expected to feel euphoric and more alert. And in that clarity, the hymns promised, the ancient devas would come alive to him. He brought the mortar to his lips, taking in the sweet scent emanating from the mixture. He licked the mortar’s edge and made a face- the potion was bitter, just like the hymns said it would be. Sending a silent prayer to Bharata, grand patriarch of his family, Grtsamada downed the Soma in a single gulp, resisting the urge to retch immediately after. The feeling last for a while, squirming inside his stomach and made worse by the lingering bitter taste in his mouth. Then it subsided and Grtsamada relaxed, waiting for something to happen. 

It started towards the end of the first hour, a curiously light sensation spreading outward from his gut. Soon it spread to his limbs and made him uncomfortable. Suddenly feeling suffocated inside the hut, he went out and sat by the bank, with the skyline of Kashi visible on the opposite end. Winter had retreated a month ago, and the debilitating heat of summer was still a few months away. Even at noon, with the sun beating down through clear skies, he felt no need to sit under tree-shade. The Ganga basked under this sunlight, its glistening waters giving the appearance of twinkling stars. Grtsamada lost himself in that mirage, and then the waters took shape. It began as a blob emerging from the river, streamlets cascading down the body. As the blob floated closer to him it acquired a hominid outline, limbs and head emerging into discernible outlines. Grtsamada smiled, knowing that this was the Soma taking effect. 

In the next few hours, what consumed him was no euphoria but an alternate world of its own. Colours and shapes appeared in his consciousness of the kind he’d never seen or dreamt before, introducing to him the many possibilities of his own mind. He tried directing the flow to find he had no control- he was a passive observer within his own imagination. He lost track of time, not knowing whether hours had passed by or days. The very idea of time felt strange to entertain, as if he was giving significance to something that so clearly did not matter here- in the world that consumed him. The only thing he became alert to was the lifting of the veil. It was as if reality itself had taken a different form- its *actual *form. When the insight came to him, it was as if it had been in him all along- like light had no form of its own, so was pure existence without attributes. But when light fell on something it took the form of that thing- and that’s what reality was. It was pure existence taking the form of whatever it manifested in. He would have made a mental note to remember this epiphany, but he’d lost all sense of self by now. 

He was no longer Grtsamada Kasheya, elder son rajani Kashi. He just was, pure observer, pure consciousness. He knew not whether it was night or day, whether he sat by the river or was submerged in it. Whether he was placed in reality, or reality emanated from within him. Then a tunnel opened in front of him, all-consuming and radiating fluorescence. He was pulled into it, everything in front of him zipping by impossibly fast. He became aware of a shrill, piercing sound, rising in intensity as he fell deeper into the tunnel. Then, suddenly, he was *there*. The sound morphed into a gentle hum, echoing smoothly across the vast dome he was now placed in. The dome was made of meaning and colour, fractals conveying to him what human words had never managed to. The hum was becoming louder now, almost as if telling him to hurry up. He looked closer and found gaps in the dome, opening into myriad worlds that defied comprehension. Small, excitable figures waved to him from one of the openings, their colours telling him- *Come, join us!*

He was about to comply when the opening vanished, and the dome seemed to close in on him. He tried to escape but found he couldn’t, his consciousness locked in place by a force he could not understand. A strange, ominous voice came to him- *So, you are finally here!*

He did not hear those words, for they were not spoken. But it’s what the hum conveyed to him, suggesting that a great power now held him in its focus. *Listen*, the hum said. *Observe*.

The great power ripped Grtsamada’s consciousness open, piercing through to perceive all his warts, faults and demons. He felt violated, helpless and deeply guilty. He wanted to be out of here now, for this certainly wasn’t Soma! But the more he struggled, the deeper he fell into the great power’s gaze. *You are here now, *the dome hummed, still closing in on him. *Stop fighting it.*

But Grtsamada fought harder, feeling increasingly panicked under the great power’s grip. He felt vulnerable, suddenly realising how fragile his grasp on reality was. Everything he was could end in an instant, no doubt but a blink of an eye to this great power. Would he ever even return to his body, or was this already the end? Had he passed through the barrier to the other side? Was this what death was like? No devas appeared to him as he wrangled to get free, no beatitude glowed upon him like the hymns described. Instead his consciousness was tortured by a power so obviously omnipotent, so dominatingly omniscient, that Grtsamada eventually gave up out of sheer fatigue. He was locked in limbo for untold hours, only the waxing and waning of the hum giving him fleeting comfort.

He didn’t realise it yet, but it was close to sunrise on the next day that he finally did return to his body. He was carried back through the same tunnel he used to enter, everything zipping past in the other direction this time. But the sound of the hum did not reverse, it stayed constant, as if cradling his fragile consciousness back to full perception. Intense sunlight flooded his eyes when he opened them, but it was nothing compared to the fluorescence he just emerged from. As his eyes adjusted and he became aware of his surroundings, the hum gently subsided. *Come back again*, it seemed to say to him. *We’ll be waiting*. When the hum died down completely, he finally felt his heartbeat again, pounding hard and heavy. He took a deep breath, trying to calm himself down. The river coursed gently ahead of him, waters glistening much the same way as they did the previous day. He realised it would take some time before he processed what had just happened to him, before he could understand it completely. But thankfully he had one tangible connection, one way to recall the memories in an instant. 

The hum, the one that started piercing, the one that stayed with him throughout the experience. Both guiding and protecting him. There was something primal about it, something all-encompassing that he couldn’t describe. Grtsamada recreated the effect, bringing the sound from deep within him before resting it on his palate. There was satisfaction as he did so, a feeling of completion and contentment. “Aum,” Grtsamada chanted, a renewed vigour for his project washing over him.

