---
title: four
id: 4
---

“Now remember, you two. I want you to be on your best behaviour today. No secretive giggling, no sneaking away, no childish acts whatsoever.” Sunidhi Barhat delivered her instructions in a stern tone, pointing a finger at her son to reiterate.

Tritsu pretended to be offended. “Childish acts, mother? I am a man of twenty now!”

“Yet you regress to a boy whenever you are with your sister. And you-” Sunidhi turned to her daughter- “You are *not *a boy, no matter how bad you want to be one. At your age I was already married to your father. I don’t want to see you climbing and swinging around.”

“Yes, mother,” Vitamsi said obediently.

Sunidhi stared unconvinced, knowing her daughter’s proclivity to do whatever she wanted to anyway. “Tritsu, you will keep a check on your sister, won’t you?”

Tritsu laughed. “Only as much as she’ll let me, you know that!”

“I’m not a child either,” Vitamsi defended. “I’m only two years younger to Tritsu.”

“Enough, you two,” Sunidhi said, smiling at her children’s banter. “The full janapada will gather here today. Just don’t do anything to embarrass your father and grandfather.”

“Rest easy, mother,” Tritsu said, meaning it. Today he would be among the elders of his clan, including the formidable uparajan Samvarna. He would be on his best behaviour even without mother’s warning. 

“Who all will be there, mother?” Vitamsi asked, dreading the idea of a large family gathering- where everyone would no doubt point out that she was of marriageable age.

“Everyone, of course!” Sunidhi replied. “Uparajan Samvarna, his wife Rabhasi and mother Riksha. The elder paters, their wives, sons and grandsons. Today is a momentous day after all. The last time a welcomed a new member of a family was twelve years ago, when young Mudgala was born.”

“Do we have to be there for the whole thing?” Vitamsi asked, eyes pleading mother for some leeway.

Sunidhi rolled her eyes, feeling indulgent nonetheless. “You have to be there for the main ritual. You can disappear after lunch but be back before dinner. Now go, your father will be looking for you already.”

“When can we see the baby?” Tritsu asked.

“Soon, first the morning ritual at the ghat. Go!”

Winter had retreated only a month ago, and the early sun beat pleasantly through a cool breeze. The Ganga’s western bank was visible in the distance, but its width extended into the horizon. This was the Bharata town of Kanyakubja, home to the line of his firstborn and daughter, Jahnu. Established several centuries in the past, Kanyakubja began as a manufacturing hub for scents, called kanyas in the local prakrit. The most sought-after product was a scent made from the kubjaka, musk rose, that grew abundantly along the Ganga on either side here. From the kanya of kubjaka the town had received its name, and the late patriarch Bharata had conquered it early in his life. His daughter Jahnu was born here, as were Jahnu’s daughter Riksha and grandson Samvarna. Now that line extended a generation further. To Samvarna and his wife Rabhasi a son had been born, yet to be named. In celebration, Kanyakubja was host to all members of the Bharata janapada, core and wide.

The first set of rituals were complete only after noon, when the morning sun had turned to an angry, hot ball. The family converged for lunch, eagerly waiting for Rabhasi to arrive with her newborn. There was a suitable amount of cooing and aah-ing when Rabhasi did come, the infant cradled in her arms and Riksha beaming as the proud grandmother behind her. Tritsu kept his eyes on uparajan Samvarna, who had spent the entire day performing rituals under the purohit’s instructions. Samvarna was a picture of impassivity, ignoring the hub around his wife and son as he ensured meals were being served to all. 

Taking their respective bowls, Tritsu and Vitamsi sat by their father, where rajan Ajamidha and the elder paters gathered in a circle with Samvarna. With all the clan patriarchs here together, Tritsu realised he had an opportunity. “Father,” he whispered to Brhat, “Can you talk to uparajan Samvarna about me now?”

In the middle of taking a morsel of food, Brhat raised his eyes quizzically. “In time, Tritsu. This is not the place.”

Tritsu wanted to protest. For months he’d been pestering his father to let him join the uparajan’s contingent. There was no better way to learn the warrior way, father used to say this himself when Tritsu was younger. From the corner of his eye he sensed Vitamsi trying to suppress a snicker at his latest failed attempt. 

“Brhat has spoken to me already, Tritsu,” Samvarna said, clearly having overheard the engagement. “But you must take your rajan’s permission first.”

Rajan Ajamidha turned to his grandson. “What is this about, Tritsu?”

Tritsu hesitated, looking to his father, who gestured- *Go ahead now!*

“I thought it was time for me to join a contingent, grandfather,” Tritsu said. “My years of practice are over.”

“Then you should join your father’s contingent,” Ajamidha said. “Brhat?”

“I would take him father,” Brhat said. “But the boy insists on campaigning with brother Samvarna.”

Ajamidha chuckled. “That’s your fault then,” he said to his son. “Tritsu has grown up hearing you tell him about the uparajan, and how he trained you when you were younger.”

Brhat nodded. “My fault indeed,” he said, bringing a smile to the gathering’s faces. “He can join Samvarna if you are okay with it, father.”

Rajan Ajamidha nodded in assent, happy that his grandson was stepping up and taking responsibility. Samvarna was the eldest of his generation, a veteran of war and strategy. Once he had trained Brhat, and now Tritsu too would benefit from serving under him. 

“I will also join!” Piped the fourteen-year old Vitsava, grandson to Dvimidha, bringing another wave of laughter to the circle. 

“Soon you will, Vitsu,” Ajamidha chuckled. “You and Mudgala both.”

Only Vitamsi seemed unhappy, knowing that she wouldn’t be permitted to join any contingent. *Soon, we must find you a suitor- *was her father’s constant refrain. Rabhasi had suitably introduced her newborn, and the women of the family now joined the gathering. The entire Bharata clan sat in a wide circle, presenting a sight that Ajamidha knew would have made his grandfather proud- just as it made him proud now. His brothers Dvimidha and Purumidha, elder paters to the clan, were here with their wives Mrgnayani and Pravitta. Dvimidha’s son Kushambha and his wife Kirati with their son, Vitsava. Purumidha’s son Nila, Nila’s wife Dravidi and their son, Mudgala. There was Ajamidha’s own son of course- Brhat, scion to the janapada and next in line to Ajamidha. Brhat’s wife and Ajamidha’s beloved daughter-in-law Sunidhi. Their beautiful children Tritsu and Vitamsi, medicine to Ajamidha’s ageing heart. And then there were the hosts- eldest line of the grand patriarch Bharata. Riksha, elder mater, daughter to Jahnu. Her son and his wife- Samvarna and Rabhasi, and their unnamed newborn. 

“So, uparajan,” Ajamidha said, “Have you decided what you will name your son?”

“The purohit has suggested a name starting with ‘ku’,” Samvarna replied, “And the rest I leave to my wife.”

The family looked to Rabhasi, cradling her newborn. She gazed down at his sleeping face, beaming with pride. “He is my golden jewel, this boy,” she said, smiling widely. “I think I’m going to name him Kuruvista- a little packet of gold. That’s what the rest of you will call him at least. For me, he will be my little Kuru.”

“A fine naming,” Ajamidha declared. “But the firstborn must carry his father’s name too. So we shall call him Kuru Samvarni-” Ajamidha stopped and bowed to Rabhasi in jestful apology. “Forgive me, daughter. He is Kuru to you alone. We shall call him Kuruvista Samvarni.”

Rabhasi nodded, returning the rajan’s mirth with a shy smile. Beside her, the elder mater Riksha observed- “I wish my mother was alive to see him.”

“Or our grandfather,” Dvimidha added. “I still remember how elated grandfather was when you were born, Samvarna. Grandmother had to stop him from dancing about with you in his arms.” Even sombre Samvarna chuckled at that, but Tritsu and Vitamsi smiled only politely. Born in a time after Bharata’s death, they did not share their elders’ memories of the late patriarch. 

The mood was light, and even the rajan seemed to be in good humour. This was the chance Riksha was waiting for. “And will the rajan not gift something to his clan’s newborn?” 

“Of course!” said Ajamidha. “What would the clan mater have me gift?”

“Only a blessing, my rajan,” Riksha replied. “But one I’m afraid he cannot get here.”

Ajamidha frowned slightly. “I don’t follow you, sister.”

“You call me the clan mater, but you know I’m not the eldest, Aja. The clan mater, the *elder *mater, resides in Kashi.”

The afternoon’s light atmosphere tensed perceptibly at the mention of Kashi, furrowing even Tritsu and Vitamsi’s brows. They knew the story well. Kashi, the city of the traitors. Survivors of the family line that almost destroyed the janapada thirty years ago, triggering the grand patriarch’s demise. Leave Kashi alone, and leave Kashi alone- this is what Bharata had said before dying. So this is what the janapada had done. And now Riksha opened old wounds.

“This is unexpected, Riksha,” Ajamidha admitted. “No one goes to Kashi, you know that. We don’t even know how they will receive you.”

“I do,” said Riksha. “I’ve been in communication with our sister for years. Don’t pretend you don’t know that, rajan.”

“This cannot happen,” elder pater Dvimidha said. “They are a bunch of traitors, and we will not go anywhere near them.”

“The traitors died on the day of their treachery, brother,” Riksha argued, speaking of Sunahotra and Shala. “The people who now live in Kashi are uncle Sunahotra’s descendants, yes, but they are *our *people- our janapada.”

“They were complicit in the act,” Purumidha argued. “They knew what uncle Sunahotra and Shala planned, and they chose to flee to Kashi. They should have submitted themselves to father immediately.”

Tritsu listened intently to the argument play out. He’d grown up hearing of Sunahotra’s treachery, and imbibed from his elders their hatred of the Kashi line. In the time of Bharata, the janapada’s enemies were other tribes. By Tritsu’s time, the Kashi line was portrayed to be the only enemy. Amid the argument, Tritsu noted his grandfather’s silence. Ajamidha did not participate in the debate, instead seeming deep in thought himself. 

“Why doesn’t grandfather say something?” Vitamsi whispered.

“He’s going to agree,” Tritsu said, sensing his grandfather’s mind. “He’s never hated Kashi as much as the others.”

Tritsu was proven right when, after a little more back and forth, Ajamidha held his hand up and gestured for the family to quieten. “What does my uparajan think of this?”

Samvarna’s face was set grim. “I follow my rajan’s orders.”

“And I am thankful for that,” Ajamidha replied. “But you are also the newborn’s father. Does the father wish for his son to receive the elder mater’s blessings?”

“It is not about what I wish for my son, rajan. It’s about what is right for him. And it is right for the elder mater to bless a clan newborn.”

“And what of Mudgala, or Vitsava?” Purumidha countered. “Or of Tritsu and Vitamsi? They never received these blessings.”

“It would have been right for them to, too,” Samvarna calmly replied. 

Ajamidha held his hand up again before his brothers could argue. “Samvarna says nothing wrong. And what have we always done when faced with conflict or indecision? We have asked what the late patriarch would have done.”

“Among all of us, grandfather loved Kashi the most,” Riksha added, sensing that Ajamidha was nearing assent. “He would have wanted this.”

“Will she have you?” The rajan asked.

“She will,” Riksha replied. 

“Samvarna, you must go with your mother,” Ajamidha said, placing a hand on Dvimidha’s shoulder to keep him from protesting. “Keep a contingent posted nearby when you’re there. I don’t want any incidents.”

Samvarna nodded, accepting his rajan’s command. Letting the moment get better of him, Tritsu blurted out- “I want to go too!”

“Stay out of this, son,” said Brhat, turning stern eyes to Tritsu.

Tritsu looked to his grandfather, who said- “Don’t turn to me now. You follow your father’s command.”

“But you said I could join uncle Samvarna on his next scouting campaign!” Tritsu argued. “Isn’t this a scouting campaign? He’s going to Kashi, where we’ve never gone before.” 

“The boy’s argument has merit,” Ajamidha conceded. “What do you say, Brhat?”

“Please, father,” Tritsu pleaded. “I’ll follow uncle Samvarna’s every command.”

“Fine!” Brhat said, annoyed with his son’s insistence.

“If Tritsu’s going, so am I,” Vitamsi added. There was no way she was going to sit back while Tritsu visited Kashi. 

“Not a chance!” Brhat snapped, his tone rising. “This is not an evening at the ghat.”

“If Tritsu’s going, so am I, father,” Vitamsi repeated unafraid.  

“Let her go, Brhat,” Sunidhi said softly. “She’ll only sulk without her brother.”

It was decided then. Late patriarch Bharata’s elder line would journey to the younger line’s home- thirty years after their estrangement. Tritsu was sleepless that night, his mind visualising the meeting with his clan-enemies. He was up at dawn, joining uparajan Samvarna as he readied the boat that would take them downstream to Kashi. Still exhausted and in need of much sleep, Rabhasi would stay behind in Kanyakubja. By the time the sun fully rose, Samvarna, Riksha with the infant Kuru, Tritsu, Vitamsi and a contingent of soldiers had set sail for Kashi.
