---
title: ten
id: 10
---

Prayaga – The Sacrifice, capital of the Bharata janapada, established more than eighty years ago at the culmination of Bharata’s grand Ashvamedha. The city’s oldest parts were located closest to the confluence point, but newer settlements constantly cropped up to expand the city westwards. Across the Ganga on the north stood the old town of Pratisthana, most of its ruins intact as vivid reminder of the Ashvamedha. A tall, larger-than-life statue of Suhotra, Bharata’s elder son, stared down at Prayaga from Pratisthana’s banks. When Grtsamada was younger, his family’s broken history was all his mother talked about. As he grew older he distanced himself from that, immersing himself in the veda he tried to build. But now, as the morning sun rose, it gave a formidable shadow to Suhotra’s statue, under which Grtsamada conducted his morning prayers. It was hard not to think of that history now, and he imagined what things would have been like if his own grandfather, Sunahotra, had never rebelled. If Prayaga and Kashi had been one all along, united under the common banner of Bharata.

For one, he wouldn’t get the stares he did as he conducted his prayers. Word had spread across Prayaga that members of the Kashi line had arrived the night before. Citizens gathered at the ghats to catch a glimpse of Grtsamada, curiosity getting the better of their civil sense. He tried to ignore it as he finished his rituals and made his way back to Prayaga’s rajanalaya. The architecture in Prayaga was austere, in sharp contrast to Kashi’s opulent temples and fondness for gold. Even the rajanalaya, though it once housed grand patriarch Bharata, was made mostly of mud and wood. Later, Grtsamada learnt that the rajanalaya’s parts were routinely demolished and re-constructed to accommodate the confluence’s seasonal swelling and waning.

Grtsamada entered the council hall with some apprehension, not knowing what sort of reaction he might receive. Ketumana was already there, seated beside Tritsu and in the midst of animated conversation. Grtsamada’s eyes went to the throne first, where he saw the massive figure of rajan Ajamidha seated and staring back at him. Seated behind him were his brothers, the elder paters Dvimidha and Purumidha. It had been decades since he’d seen them, but Grtsamada recognised his cousins- Brhat, Kushambha and Nila. Their faces were expressionless, a tense atmosphere hanging in the air. It was Samvarna who approached and welcomed Grtsamada, thanking him for coming and gesturing towards a seat. There was no further mention of the Kasheyas presence, nor of the rift thirty years old. Only the looks Grtsamada received from his cousins were indication of that troubled past.

Uparajan Samvarna spoke first, giving a complete report of the attacks on Kampilya and Kashi. “For years I’ve petitioned you for a campaign along the Yamuna,” he concluded, making sure to keep his tone respectful when he addressed the rajan. “We last patrolled its banks in the time of patriarch Bharata. We can ignore the rest of Aryavarta, but it will not ignore us.”

Ajamidha nodded, silently accepting the blame. Age had considerably dulled his ambition and vigil, and he’d never completely forgiven himself for Shala’s death. It was good that Shala’s son Aristanemi was not among the party from Kashi. Ajamidha was not sure he could have met the boy’s eyes. As it is, he detected blame in Grtsamada’s eyes whenever he dared to glance.

“Less than a hundred men attacked Kampilya,” Samvarna observed. “Which means that they knew the outpost was thinly manned. I have reason to believe they’ve taken captives.”

“Another reason to mount an immediate counterattack,” Dvimidha declared. 

“I agree, elder pater, but there is a small matter of our guests’ arrival to discuss,” Samvarna pointed out, gesturing to the guests from Kashi.

Dvimidha scoffed, making it clear what he thought of the Kasheyas’ presence. “The first sign of trouble and the traitors come to us for help! Trouble at Kashi is of no concern to us.”

“Forgive me, elder pater, but you’re letting resentment cloud your judgment. Even if you are apathetic to Kashi’s needs, increasing aggression by foreign tribes is of concern to Prayaga as well.”

Brhat reminded his cousin who he was- “I think it is your judgment that’s clouded, uparajan of Prayaga. Our northern outpost is attacked, and you talk of alliance with Kashi. Is your loyalty compromised by just one visit?”

Tritsu wanted to counter his father, but forced himself silent out of respect. He agreed with his uncle- the threats Prayaga and Kashi faced must be dealt together. He looked to Ajamidha for his expression, but grandfather was characteristically silent again. 

“If this is your suspicion, cousin Brhat, then you are welcome to petition the rajan for my removal. I will concede the position to you if that is his will.” Samvarna stood unfazed by Brhat’s allegation, knowing that his rajan did not think like the others.

“This argument is useless,” Purumidha said, frustration evident in his voice. “Our first action right now has to be to retake Kampilya. Everything else comes later.”

Listening silently so far, Grtsamada was finally bristled. “Then perhaps we waste our time here,” he said, wishing instead that he was in the markets looking for Dirghatapasa.

“Perhaps you do,” Purumidha declared, gesturing that Grtsamada was free to leave.

“My mother knew not to expect anything of you,” Grtsamada stated, accusing the elder paters. “For thirty years we have protected ourselves just fine. We can do so even now.”

Samvarna could see this getting out of hand. “Calm yourself, cousin. Let us not say things that fuel the fire.”

“No, he is right, Samvarna,” Dvimidha insisted. “Let them go the way they came. We have our own borders to protect. And that Kashi is not a part of these borders was made clear thirty years ago.”

Tritsu looked helplessly at his father, then his grandfather. Brhat seemed satisfied with the proceedings, but Ajamidha remained inscrutably silent- not making eye contact with Tritsu. Numbed to silence in the presence of such elders, Ketumana too could not speak his mind, and Grtsamada left the gathering in a huff, gesturing for his nephew to follow. The first meeting between the two Bharata lines since thirty years went just as well as anyone expected. Samvarna and Tritsu did not know it, but they both thought the same thing- *Why did rajan Ajamidha not speak up and prevent this?*

He spoke only after the Kasheyas had left, a sense of resignation in his tone. “Samvarna, mount a counter-attack and retake Kampilya. We will have to do this alone, for now.”* *
