---
title: three
id: 3
---


“Where were they last spotted?” Hastina asked.

The rshi pointed between a clearing in the trees, across the valley, to the hill opposite them. “A herd was seen feeding there just last evening, my king.”

“Did you see which way they went?”

“There’s a lake nearby, on the other side of that hill. No doubt they went there to water.”

“And you can lead us there?”

The rshi straightened himself proudly. “This is my home,” he said. “I know every crevice, every stream here.”

“Good,” Hastina nodded approvingly. “Then lead the way.”

“Right now, my king?” The rshi frowned. “We won’t make it before nightfall. It’s best to camp here tonight and begin just before sunrise.”

“There are tigers in this forest too, my king,” Mantim, his aide, reminded him.

“And leopards,” the rshi added. “And they hunt at night. Our flaming torches will only attract their attention.”

“Very well,” Hastina said, feeling frustrated nonetheless. Mantim conveyed his message to the rest of the soldiers, and the forest was lit with small campfires. In the moonlight the distant peaks of the Himalaya were visible, but for yojanas around them were lush, jagged foothills. They were still at a height though, and without the fires it would be a chilly night. Cedars, spruces, pines and oaks of many kinds populated the forest, mixed with dense clusters of figs. The Himalayan snows never quite reached here, even in the peak of winter, and the names in this land were derived from the trees that nourished it. Spread across the foothills was the coniferous pine, shiva, giving the range its name- Shivalaya. And south of their camp, nestled in a valley where the great Sarasvati river once flowed, was Hastina’s home. A sacred forest of figs was maintained there, the town named after the fig itself- Plaksha. The Sarasvati still survived here in parts and pieces, several lakes, ponds and rivulets a reminder of the once was. Isolated huts and temples could be spotted in the trees, scattered across the hills as tribute to the vivid culture and ritual that once thrived here. 

The glory days may be in the past, but the culture still survived in many forms. Hastina reminded himself of that as he saw the rshi utter prayers over the fire, invoking their patron deity, Soma – the Moon. Composed in an earlier era, the prayers were in the old language- a purified, high form of the prakrit that Hastina was familiar with. He asked the rshi to explain his prayer, bringing an excited smile to the old man’s face.

“It’s a prayer of gratitude,” the rshi explained, “Thanking the moon for its luminescence and pleading for it to continue protecting us- as it always has.”

Hastina found much to argue in that but kept his silence, knowing better than to offend his rshi-cum-guide. The rshi read his expression though. “Speak your mind, my king,” he said. 

Hastina hesitated. “It’s nothing.”

“It’s something the moment you call it *it*,” the rshi said. “Tell me, and we can see together whether *it *is nothing.”

Hastina smiled, familiar with the rshis’ fondness for wordplay. “It’s just that you said the moon has always protected us.”

“Yes?”

“But has it really?”

“Where has it failed, my king?”

Hastina tried not to scoff. “Our empire lies broken, usurped by lesser tribes. Our dynasty obscured, our cities lost. Even our great river died out. Where has Soma been all this while?”

“Empires belong to men, not to people. Empires may die- cultures continue. Dynasties may get obscured, but blood survives- you are proof of this. Cities wax and wane, as do rivers. Soma does not protect us from nature, nor from time- all devas are subservient to these.”

“What does Soma protect us from then?”

“From our own follies,” the rshi said, the flames dancing in his eyes. “From the most destructive potential in our lives- our own selves.”

That was the Atri school’s philosophy after all, expressed to Hastina in various ways over the years. It encouraged one to see the devas as sentient forces of nature, possessed of independent intent and ability. It was a worldview, however, that he found little resonance with. He saw no deeper mystery to the sun or the moon, or to fire and water. He understood them as the natural entities they were, but could not imagine a spiritual presence behind then. The rshi detected the doubt on Hastina’s face and smiled wisely. “What we perceive with our limited senses is but a fraction of reality, my king. Sitting just above our level of perception is a deeper reality, that’s why we call it *upanisad- *residing above.”

Hastina nodded. “My forefather’s concept.”

“Mostly, yes,” the rshi agreed. “But upanisad meant something else back then.” Smiling wisely again at the frown on Hastina’s face, the rshi continued- “Break it apart, my king, and you will see. Upanisad is made of *upa *and *nisad. *Most literally, upanisad merely means ‘sitting’ or ‘residing’ above- and that is how your forefather delivered his lessons. Maharshi Atri would sit on an elevated platform built around a plaksha tree, and his disciples would sit on the ground around him. He sat above, so his teachings were called upanisad. In time, the maharshi himself devised a deeper meaning to the term.”

“And later students such as yourself continue to evolve it,” Hastina said, trying to compliment the man.

The rshi made a gesture of backing off. “Not even remotely, my king. The greatest rshis after maharshi Atri were the kings themselves- Pururava, Ayu and Nahusha. Even your progenitor, Puru, was a spiritual king. And after him, your clan birthed the rshis Medhatithi, Kanva, Praskanva- all from the royal lines. I am a simple student of the vidya your clan discovers.”

It was a connection that made Hastina uncomfortable. The worldview and philosophy this rshi now endorsed was started by Hastina’s own ancient ancestor, and later propagated by other forefathers in the Puru clan. But it was a worldview he didn’t share. He claimed his Puru heritage with pride- embracing the imperial history that he now sought to revive. But he felt little connection to the Somavansha kings that preceded Puru, or to the maharshi Atri who started it all, even if they were elder paters to the Puru tribe. 

The skepticism was evident on his face, for the rshi continued- “That spiritual blood flows in you too, my king, whether you relate to it or not. Maharshi Atri’s grandson Pururava founded the Somavansha, and Pururava’s great-grandson Ayu was father to Puru. You are in the line of maharshi Atri just as much as you are in the line of Puru. And the maharshi himself descended from Tapin Soma. This makes you a Soma too, my king.”

The rshi’s face was dead serious, the flames dancing in his grey eyes and throwing his emaciated figure into sharp relief. Hastina stared grimly into those eyes, trying to imagine the power the Puru and Somavanshi kings of old would have wielded- descended as they did from Soma! Whether he believed in this himself or not did not matter. What mattered was whether people believed it, and whether they would follow him in their belief. If the idea of Hastina Puru as Soma incarnate got him more men, more weapons, more grain- then it was a good idea indeed. 

“And will people follow their Soma king?” Hastina asked. “Will they answer his call?”

The rshi straightened as if to say- *look at me!* Aloud he said- “You only need call, my king. These lands remember the Puru imprint, just as much as they remember that of the great Sarasvati. They have birthed many Puru kings and have resisted taming by any foreign hand. Plaksha, Haradvara, even Ahikshetra- they await your return.”

“Plaksha, Haradvara and Ahikshetra have always been Puru,” Hastina said. “We never lost them. What we lost was our capital- Pratisthana. What we lost was our rightful place along the Ganga. What we lost, was gained by the Bharatas.”

A subtle smile crept upon the rshi’s face as he tried to guess his king’s intent. “Is that why would chase this herd of elephants, to tame them?”

Hastina nodded. “To fight fire, you need fire. In the time our tribe has languished, the Bharatas have grown stronger. They have strong armies and vast contingents of elephant cavalries. When my mother named me, she was only foretelling me the means to success. I will rebuild the Puru elephant contingents. I will reform our army. And then I will bring war to the Bharatas and reclaim the kingdom of my ancestors.”

“May Soma be with you,” the rshi solemnly declared. 
