---
title: '05'
id: 5
---

“Aum?” Aristanemi repeated, feeling the sound on his lips. “What does it mean?”

“I don’t know,” Grtsamada confessed. “I just know that there is something primal and original about this sound. It’s the genesis of everything.”

“But the stuff you had wasn’t Soma?”

“No, it couldn’t have been. I wasn’t euphoric or alert. I wasn’t even fully aware. The hymns do not say that Soma makes you lose all sense of time and reality.”

“True,” Aristanemi conceded, thinking about it himself. “But maybe it means my theory is right. There is more than one Soma. Different soma plants had different effects and are thus remembered differently.”

Grtsamada nodded, giving merit to Aristanemi’s suggestion. “You could be right, but in any case this gives me an idea.”

“What?”

“I’ve been thinking of how to organise the hymns. By whom they are attributed to? By what school composed them? By how old they are? I wasn’t able to chose among these, until now. I think it’s best to group them by the school that composed them, because the schools differ in their interpretation of things and this is the best way to retain that.”

“So, a separate group for Bhrigus, a separate for Vasishthas, and so on?”

“Something like that,” Grtsamada nodded. “But it’s easier said than done. I don’t know the composers of several hymns, and for others they could have been composed by different rshis together.”

“And what are you going to do for Soma?”

“For now? I think it’s best to treat Soma simply as a deva, like Indra or Agni. At least till I find the original Soma. After that, who knows?”

Aristanemi chuckled and shook his head. “But what’s the point of all this, brother? What are you hoping to achieve?”

It’s a discussion they’d had several times before, but Aristanemi never tired of it. “I seek simply to *know*, Nemi,” Grtsamada explained. “The vast vidya contained in our ancient hymns, the history and geography of our ancestors hidden in them. I want to know it all, assimilate it and organise it for all posterity. A collective *Veda*, if you will.”

Grtsamada expressed himself honestly, but it did nothing to explain his motivations to Aristanemi, who still shook his head dismissively. “The prayers have survived all these years without you. They’ll survive on their own still.”

“That’s where you’re wrong, brother. Who know how many prayers we have already lost, how many devas forgotten in a history we remember vaguely as it is? What we have is what’s been preserved by the rshi schools, each partial in its preservation. And what if the schools die out one day? No, the veda of Aryavarta must be preserved in a more lasting way. The rchas that tell the story of our ancestors deserve better.”

Aristanemi was undaunted. “Is that why you refuse to go to any rshi school?” He challenged. “To preserve your project from their influence?”

“Perhaps,” Grtsamada admitted. “But I feel no need for them, their hymns already known to the priests here in Kashi. What new can they add to my project?”

“You wouldn’t know till you visit one, will you?”

Grtsamada made a face. “Come now, brother. You really think there’s something to be had in visiting a Vasishtha or Atri ashrama?”

“Maybe not, but what about an Angirasa ashrama? They might know things about our own forefather- Bharata. Surely there’s something to learn there.”

There certainly was, and Grtsamada nodded in agreement. But he didn’t need to voice aloud the problem with that. The Angirasa rshis were based out of Prayaga, their head acting rajpurohit to rajan Ajamidha. And it had been thirty years since someone from Kashi had set foot in Prayaga. And so when a messenger arrived a day after to announce that a retinue from Prayaga would be visiting them, Grtsamada wondered whether the stars had aligned in his favour.
