---
title: '06'
id: 6
---

The blaring call of a conch told Ketumana that the guests’ boat had been sighted. Making sure his armour was set just right, he made his way to the river bank. By the time the Ganga reached Kashi its previously southwards flow turned completely west, placing the city on the river’s north-west banks. This was the city of Sunahotra, younger son to the late patriarch Bharata. Sunahotra established it at the young age of twenty-one, and named it after his beloved daughter and firstborn. To keep this city he went against his father and won. When the father was stepping down and giving it all to the elder son, Sunahotra went against him again. He lost his life in that attempt but won the city for his descendants. The daughter resided here, an exiled existence for the Bharata janapada’s elder mater.

Her grandson Ketumana reached the ghat to find the boat anchoring itself. Feeling mildly apprehensive, he approached the dock to welcome the visitors. Uparajana Samvarna alighted first, surveying the scene to ensure it was safe for the others. Ketumana approached him uncertainly. “Welcome, Sauhotri,” he said, using the patronymic for Suhotra’s line. “I am Ketumana, uparajan of Kashi and grandson to the rajani.”

Samvarna assessed the young man before him, feeling pleased to set eyes on this nephew for the first time. “Uparajan,” he commented. “A heavy responsibility for such young shoulders.”

“I bear it well, I assure you,” Ketumana replied, trying to look confident.

“Of that I have no doubt.” Samvarna smiled and pulled his nephew into a hug. “I am uparajan Samvarna of Prayaga.”

On hearing that, Ketumana broke from the hug and touched his uncle’s feet. “Forgive me, uparajan. I did not know it was you, or I would not have addressed you as a Sauhotri.”

“What would you have addressed me as then?” Samvarna’s eyes twinkled curiously.

“My grandmother has taught me the family tree well, uncle. I know that you are a Jahnavi- in the line of Jahnu.”

“And you have retained your education well,” Samvarna commented. “Come, meet your cousins.”

Samvarna let out a whistle and the remaining entourage alighted from the boat. Tritsu emerged first, his demeanour guarded. Guessing who he was, Ketumana approached him with folded hands. “Welcome, elder cousin,” he said. “I am Ketumana, son of Dhanvantari and grandson of Kashi.”

Tritsu acknowledged the greeting with a nod. Then Ketumana bent for the feet of the next visitor- Riksha. “Bless me, grandmother.”

Riksha fondly brushed Ketumana’s head before pulling him back up. Placing her hands around his cheeks, she was effusive. “How long I have pined to see you, young Ketu. Your grandmother has told me so much about you.”

Ketumana smiled, not expecting such affection. “And this must be my newborn cousin,” he said, stroking the cheeks of the infant in Riksha’s arms. Before he could comment on how beautiful the boy looked, his eyes went to the next alighter from the boat. At the virile age of eighteen, Ketumana was not unfamiliar to attractions of the other sex. But the woman who now stepped out of the boat was unlike any he had ever seen. She seemed to float down, an indescribable allure to her face. Then he realised who it was and felt a wave of shame. This was his sister, uncle Brhat’s daughter Vitamsi. 

“Welcome, cousin,” he said to her, his voice sounding to him at a higher pitch.

Unknown to him, the sister felt a similar wave of guilt. With Tritsu it was different, they had grown up together as siblings. But with this young man, she noticed the taut forearms, the bulging shoulders, and even the thick calves. She realised, before abashedly wishing the thought away, that this was a *real* man. “Thank you, cousin,” she managed to voice out, still struggling with her mixed feelings. 

“Grandmother and the rest of the family are waiting for you at the rajanalaya halls,” Ketumana said to the group. “Please, follow me.”

He led them through Kashi’s busy streets, bubbling with ritual altars and day markets. People recognised Ketumana as he walked by, but seemed not to know who followed him. Tritsu noted that the city was unusually full of temples, a different prayer ringing out from each. They passed one and he heard a soma prayer being chanted, but as they neared another that voice faded away and was replaced by chants to agni. *If Prayaga is a city of rivers*, he thought to himself, *then Kashi is a city of temples.* 

“What do you think?” Samvarna’s voice broke into Tritsu’s thoughts. “Not the kind of reception we expect from enemies, is it?”

“The children of Kashi are not our enemy,” Tritsu said, parroting what Riksha had said to him on the boat. 

Samvarna nodded and placed an arm around Tritsu. “Remember that, nephew. Our real enemies are external- gathering outside our borders while our attention is turned inwards.” The uparajan was glad for this opportunity to talk to his nephew, outside the presence of Ajamidha and the others. Samvarna was a dutiful man, but he did not share the primary Bharata line’s hatred for its younger one. He had served most of his life at and beyond the Bharata realm’s borders, and he knew too well that the real enemies amassed outside. 

“Yes, uncle,” Tritsu replied, feeling fortunate to interact with the formidable uparajan. Samvarna was his childhood idol, for he’d heard enough stories of the uparajan’s prowess and leadership in battle. It was Samvarna who, even at the young age of sixteen, had let the Bharata campaign to southern Aryavarta and returned with valuable booties of gold, iron and weaponry. Tritsu was born after that time, but growing up in Prayaga it was hard not to notice- His grandfather regularly went on patrol missions, his father was frequently away managing western outposts, but grandfather’s brothers and their sons were in Prayaga for the most part, and it was uncle Samvarna who went on the riskiest, remotest missions. Added to it all, Samvarna was the eldest of his line- which meant that he had a legitimate claim to be rajan after Ajamidha. 

It did not seem so from the river bank, where temples blocked view, but Kashi was densely packed, its lanes tight and busy. Tritsu thought to comment on this to his sister, realising then that she was not walking alongside him. He spotted her ahead, trailing a few steps behind Ketumana and Riksha- being a part of their conversation but not quite. Making sure that Samvarna did not spot him, he picked up a pebble and chucked it lightly at Vitamsi. She looked back and silently mouthed- “What?”

Tritsu beckoned, and when Vitamsi neared he whispered. “You think I didn’t see your gaze at the ghat, dear sister? He is our cousin, you know that, right?”

Vitamsi made a face and punched him on the shoulder. “Third cousin, to be accurate,” she pointed out. “And I’m surprised you even noticed. I thought those women bathing at the bank would keep you distracted.”

“Curiosity only.” Tritsu’s blush betrayed his defence. “Have you seen female priests before?”

“I guess not,” Vitamsi replied, her gaze already back at their host. “What was uncle Samvarna saying to you?”

“Not what we usually hear,” Tritsu confessed, quickening his pace to keep up with Vitamsi. “He doesn’t see the Kashi line quite the same way as our elders do.”

“Obviously,” Vitamsi remarked, looking distracted nonetheless. “The entire battle was between Suhotra and Sunahotra. Why would the line of Jahnu care?”

“Fair point. Our elders never thought to send us here after all.”

“What’s the deal with this elder mater anyway?” Vitamsi asked, rhetorical.

“We’ll find out shortly I suppose,” Tritsu commented with a shrug. They followed Ketumana through a turn after which the path widened considerably, the unending line of temples and shops finally falling behind them. Tritsu looked ahead and the rajanalaya came into view in all its majesty. Its massive dome jutted out into the sky, the size giving it a formidable appearance. Grand pillars stood on either side, and as they came closer Tritsu spotted intricate carvings on them. 

“Victory pillars,” Samvarna observed, following his nephew’s gaze. “They were constructed in Prayaga after the janapada was established, and brought here by Sunahotra.”

Even closer a garden opened up on either side of them, narrowing the path but making it regal. Tritsu and Vitamsi exchanged marvelling looks- this was grander than Prayaga. They’d been told that Kashi was an exiled city, cut off from the larger trade and prosperity of Aryavarta. Everything they’d seen so far pointed to the contrary. Even though they expected it, the dome seemed vaster from inside, carved with the same intricacy seen on the pillars outside. The city of Kashi held surprises at every turn. 

A priestly party awaited when they entered, waving lamps around them and marking their foreheads with vermillion. One among them, who looked like the head purohit, approached Samvarna and pulled him into a tight hug. “It is great to see you, cousin,” he said, making Tritsu wonder who he was. The priest led them further inside with Ketumana, where the rajanalaya opened to a grand courtyard lined with banyan trees on all four sides. Vitamsi poked him at the waist and gestured to the center, where an old woman sat regally upon her couch. Even at first sight, she needed no introduction. This was clearly the elder mater Kashi- Sunahotra’s firstborn and Bharata’s favourite grandchild. Grey, white and black gracefully blended in her hair, tied into a neat bun. Her wrinkles, more than indicating her age, radiated power and wisdom. 

She stood up when the party entered, her happy eyes going to Riksha and the infant in her arms. “I don’t know what pleases the eye more, my sister,” she said. “The sight of you, or of this newborn.” Kashi took her time examining the infant, finally noting how he had taken his father’s looks. Tritsu waited till Samvarna had taken his blessings, then he approached her and bent at her feet.

“Stay,” she said, her voice deep and calm. “Let me look at you, Tritsuya Barhat, heir to the janapada.”

Tritsu idled, feeling conscious under her scrutiny. There was a perceptiveness in her gaze, and she carried herself with the regal air of a rajani. Vitamsi stared at her grandmother in frank admiration. Kashi was the eldest of her line, older than rajan Ajamidha even, and for thirty years she had governed her city as its rajani. Seeing her surety, the air of power and wisdom she radiated, Vitamsi felt sure that even if Sunahotra and Shala had not lost their lives, Sunahotra would have willed it all to his firstborn.

“And you must be the princess Vitamsi,” Kashi remarked, turning her attention to Vitamsi now. Vitamsi held back a frown- she hated being called a princess. “More beautiful than I’d heard,” Kashi continued. Behind her, Ketumana continued to steal furtive looks at his cousin. 

“Welcome all, to Kashi,” the elder mater said. “My family is small, so there aren’t many introductions to make. You’ve already met my younger son- Grtsamada.”

That’s when Tritsu realised who the head priest was. Grtsamada Kasheya, younger son to Kashi, and one of the late Sunahotra’s three grandsons. “And of course, Ketumana- my grandson and uparajan,” Kashi continued. “His father Dhanvantari is away, as usual. And…ah- here comes my nephew. Aristanemi, son of Shala.”

Tritsu followed her gaze to spot the man who now entered the courtyard. Long, messy hair covered parts of his face and a thick, unkempt beard covered his cheeks. But he was tall and wide, strong musculature bulging through his clothes. There was something inscrutable about him, and Tritsu reminded himself that his was the conspirator Shala’s own son. 

“Welcome, welcome,” Aristanemi said, his voice low and disinterested. He greeted Samvarna a bit warmer, and seemed suitably respectful when addressing Riksha. But he ignored Tritsu and Vitamsi completely. Vitamsi sensed that something was off between Aristanemi and the rest of his family. Kashi looked at him with a sort of disdain, and there was a strange distance between him and Grtsamada. Later at night, when they had lain to rest, she broached this with her brother.

“What did you make of uncle Aristanemi?” She asked.

“I don’t know what to make of him,” Tritsu confessed. “He was definitely strange. He looked almost like an outsider among the rest.”

“Exactly,” Vitamsi agreed. “I don’t think grandmother Kashi quite likes him.”

“Or that he likes her,” Tritsu added. “Did you notice that uncle Grtsamada touched her feet when we entered the courtyard, but uncle Aristanemi did not.”

“I did notice that. I wonder what it all means.”

“Aren’t you more curious about young Ketumana?” Tritsu teased. “He certainly seemed more interested in you than in anyone else.”

Vitamsi had a smart reply ready, but she was cut off by a loud alarm piercing through the night. As they exchanged looks, they heard the unmistakable whizzing sound of arrows. Tritsu’s suspicions were instantly up- “It’s a trap!” He declared. “They’re out to get us.”

“Don’t jump to conclusions,” Vitamsi cautioned, making for her blade.

Tritsu pulled out his own sword and went out to investigate the scene, not having to look back to know that Vitamsi followed. There was chaos outside, men and women running to shelter as arrows rained down from above. In the distance Tritsu spotted men climbing down into the compound from its walls. 

“Raiders!” Ketumana declared, joining his cousins fully armed for battle. 

“These are not your men?” Tritsu asked.

Ketumana frowned, bewildered. “Why would our men attack our own city?”

Tritsu opened his mouth, but he was cut short by a shriek of agony nearby. An arrow had finally found a mark, and the victim lay on the floor writhing. Training jumped into gear inside Tritsu. “We need to hold them off at the wall,” he said, pointing to the spot where men climbed down. “Vitamsi, can you see to this man?”

“I’m coming with you,” Vitamsi said. No way was she sitting out the fight.

“Yes, yes,” Tritsu said impatiently. “See to him and join us.” Without waiting for her to respond, he let out a battle call and ran for the wall, picking out his first victim as he approached. Ketumana followed, overtaking him only when they neared the wall and engaging with the enemy first. 

The cousins where well matched, making quick work of the descending raiders. “We need to climb up there,” Tritsu said, “And cut off their ropes. Or they’ll keep coming.”

A party of Kashi soldiers now joined them, and Ketumana instructed them to scale the wall and cut the rope. “More raiders converge at the east gate,” a solider informed. “The Prayagan marshals our men.”

“The Prayagan?” Ketumana asked.

“I think he means uncle Samvarna,” Tritsu said. “Come, we must join him.”

Ketumana nodded, following his elder cousin without protest. They were joined by Vitamsi mid-way, her face spattered with blood. “Not mine,” she said to the questioning looks on their faces. Behind her, realising that she was a warrior as well, Ketumana found himself falling deeper in attraction. They reached the east gate to find Samvarna instructing archers to fire at specific targets outside. “Can you spot the pattern?” He asked as his niece and nephews joined him. “They’re sending parties of five straight at the wall, trying to keep our archers occupied while groups of three scale the wall at the sides.”

“Then we must protect the flanks,” Tritsu said.

“Aristanemi holds the right flank, but I’m keeping the left one open.”

“Why?”

“Let them scale the wall there. Our men await inside,” Samvarna said, his face expressionless. 

“Where is uncle Grtsamada?” Vitamsi asked.

Samvarna was silent, so Ketumana responded tonelessly- “Uncle Grtsamada is not a warrior.”

Tritsu and Vitamsi stared at each other. The elder paters in Prayaga- Dvimidha and Purumidha- were not active warriors either. But even they wouldn’t hide from an attack on their own home. Vitamsi chanced a glance at Ketumana, feeling a wave of sympathy for him. His father was away from Kashi, for what purpose she knew not. His uncles seemed disinterested, and he had grown up without Sunahotra or Shala. Perhaps that’s why he seemed older than he was. For the first time, Vitamsi wondered if their perception of Kashi was wrong. Perhaps these were not their enemies after all.

“There are too many of them,” Samvarna said after a while. “They keep coming. We will need to take the battle outside.”

“I’ll go, uncle,” Ketumana said, already making to head down.

“No,” said Samvarna firmly. “You stay here, with your city.”

“Forgive me, uncle.” Ketumana held his ground. “I am the uparajan of Kashi. I am grateful for your presence here today, but I must perform my duty regardless.”

Samvarna stared at his nephew, feeling silent pride. Finally he nodded- “We go out together. You two-” he said to Tritsu and Vitamsi- “Stay here and guide the archers.”

Tritsu wanted to protest. He wanted to join his uncle and cousin on the battlefield outside. But something inside him told him to respect the situation. This was battle, and two uparajans stood before him. His duty was to obey their command, nothing more. “Understood, uncle. Stay safe.” He nodded at Ketumana as he said that, who nodded back and followed Samvarna outside. A silent look was exchanged between Ketumana and Vitamsi.

“Even now?” Tritsu couldn’t resist teasing.

“Let it go, will you,” Vitamsi said in a tired voice.

The battle lasted for hours more. Whoever the enemy was, they had strength of numbers. But Kashi had its impregnable walls- and Kashi had its uparajans. The battlefield was soon ablaze with the fire of arrows sticking into the ground, and in that light the valour of Samvarna and Ketumana was on display. Tritsu and Vitamsi watched it all from their vantage point, not knowing whether to keep their eyes on Samvarna or on Ketumana. The elder Bharata was a picture of poise and expertise. Men tried and failed to get near him, such was the swift reach of his sword. Tritsu soon lost count of how many fell to that sword, and in any case, he was distracted by the skill of his younger cousin. It was hard not to admire that speed and energy. While Samvarna calmly waited for men to charge at him and dispatched them with ease, Ketumana cut like a blaze across the field, taking the attack to the enemy. So impactful was his charge that, almost single-handedly, he forced the enemy line to fall back and take stock before making its attacks. A sliver of the sun’s rising arc became visible on the horizon before the enemy finally retreated, countless of its men lying dead or injured on the grounds outside Kashi. Aristanemi had joined the siblings mid-way through the battle, his right flank no longer needed once Samvarna and Ketumana had the enemy fully engaged. Tritsu, Vitamsi and he watched in grim silence as the Kashi soldiers proceeded to give the injured quick deaths. Cries of both agony and gratitude rent the sky, giving the otherwise triumphant situation a sombre air.

Closer to morning, the family convened in the rajanalaya courtyard, where Tritsu observed the hitherto absent Grtsamada’s apathy with disgust. There was no shame on his uncle’s face for sitting out the battle. But then grandmother Kashi or uncle Aristanemi said nothing in admonishment either. 

“Who were these people?” Vitamsi asked, finally airing the question burning in her mind since last night.

“Anavas,” Samvarna said. “They are a janapada inhabiting the forests east of Kashi and beyond. We’ve been keeping an eye on them,” he said to Ketumana directly, “But since when did they become this bold, or this numerous?”

“They’ve become both slowly over the years, uncle,” Ketumana explained, voice heavy with the memory of past raids. “Every year their attacks have gotten closer to Kashi, but we did not expect a direct attack.”

“They sent a large party, but I don’t think they really knew Kashi’s strength.”

“Or that it was further strengthened by your presence. It was my honour to fight alongside you today, uncle.”

“And mine to fight with you, young Ketumana. You were a true Bharata scion in battle today.”

Ketumana accepted the compliment with a humble bow, and his grandmother beamed proudly. Tritsu felt mildly envious- not for the praise his cousin deservedly received, but for the actual chance to have fought alongside Samvarna. 

“They know the strength now,” said Aristanemi in his low voice. “And they will return. We captured one of their men and interrogated him. The Anavas are governed together by these six brothers, all born to their previous rajan. They are not the small, forest-dwelling tribe we thought they were. This particular attack was staged from an outpost they have further along the Ganga, no more than three days journey from Kashi. They call it Pataligrama. Further on the river, where it begins to meet the grand sea, their capital city is called Tamralipti.”

“Did the man tell you the previous rajan’s name?” Samvarna asked, his tone suggesting that he had a name in mind.

“Bali.”

Samvarna leaned back in his seat, the name putting him in thought. 

“Speak your mind, uparajan,” Kashi probed.

“This is not good, mother.” Samvarna’s voice held a hint of worry. “I know Bali and his sons, I’ve fought them once- years ago, days south of Kashi. I knew then that they were Anavas, but their numbers were small and tactics basic. They were fierce fighters though, and Bali commanded great respect in his men. He had just the two sons then- Anga and Vanga.”

“Now joined by Kalanga, Telanga, Odhra and Andhra,” Aristanemi growled.

“Which is bad news,” Samvarna observed. “With so many sons, their janapada is bound to expand for territory. We know little about the land beyond these forests, but I would imagine they are not as fertile and alluring as these. I think the attack last night demonstrates their intent to expand towards the heart of Aryavarta.”

“What does this mean for us?” Ketumana asked.

“Trouble, as I’ve suspected for years,” Samvarna replied, meeting Tritsu’s eyes as he said so. “Our janapada has grown insular these past decades. And outside our borders, foreign tribes look to our lands with coveting eyes.” He appealed to Kashi- “We must end our fight, mother. The janapada needs to be one again.”

There was no expression in Kashi’s eyes. “The janapada never was one.”

“Not this again,” Riksha pleaded softly. “You refuse to let go of the past, sister.”

“Because the past is my present,” Kashi responded, still expressionless. “While Suhotra’s clan lives a peaceful existence in Prayaga, my father and brother are dead. While your homes are full of the laughter of children, there are no children here. No elder paters. No Bharata janapada.”

 “Then let us change it, mother,” Samvarna said. “I have no doubt of your grandson’s valour and leadership. He is Kashi’s able protector. But if everything we’ve learnt about the Anavas is true, Kashi will need Prayaga. And Prayaga will need Kashi. For years I’ve received reports of a resurgent Puru rajan in the north. We are soon going to be pressed from all sides.”

“What do you propose then, uparajan of Prayaga?”

“A council,” Samvarna said instantly. “Let Ketumana come with me to Prayaga and meet with the rajan. We shall bring amity between our lines.”

Kashi’s vacant look finally broke, rancour radiating from her eyes. “Send my only grandson, the scion of my line, to the city where his own elders died? You think me a fool, uparajan.”

Samvarna sighed, looking to his mother for help. “What do you want, Kashi?” Riksha asked. “We came here, did we not? There were voices in Prayaga similar to yours- admonishing us for even thinking of coming to the city of traitors. I am here because I disagreed with them. I brought the scion of my line and placed him at your feet.”

Kashi’s wall broke for a moment before she responded. “The line of Sunahotra and the line of Jahnavi have no quarrel.”

“And we have no quarrel with the line of Suhotra either. Think of my position, dear sister. I have family in Prayaga and in Kashi. I want my grandson to grow up in both homes. Would you have me leave him to your ransom? Send your grandson to Prayaga. Let him meet with the elder paters. And till he returns safely to you, keep my little Kuru.”

That was too much for Kashi, who bowed her head and took a deep breath, suddenly looking old and weary. “You shame me by making such an offer, sister. I would have Kuru in my home, but only because he is my grandson and I love him- not as a tool to bargain with.” Kashi asked her grandson- “Will you go to Prayaga?”

“Only if you wish it, grandmother,” Ketumana replied, not sharing that he earnestly wanted to. Kashi’s own resentment of the past had passed to him only mildly, buffered by his absent father and apathetic uncles. And meeting with Samvarna and his cousins had only fuelled an existing curiosity for that side of the family.

“You can consider me his guardian, mother,” Samvarna said. “Your scion will not be alone in Prayaga.”

“I’m coming as well.” Grtsamada’s statement caught everyone off-guard, but Aristanemi understood immediately- this was Grtsamada’s chance to visit the Angirasas. Kashi waved her hand dismissively, apparently not caring either way whether Grtsamada went or not.

Later that night he explained himself to Aristanemi. “It’s you who planted the seed in my mind! Maybe there’s something I can learn from the rshi schools, especially the Angirasa school.”

Aristanemi nodded in agreement. “I guessed as much, and I wish you well, brother. I hope you learn something. But you were missed in the battle last night, you know?” 

Grtsamada shrugged. “I’m no warrior and I know it. Unlike you, apparently.”

Aristanemi returned the shrug, equally nonchalant. “Everyone was out fighting, I just joined in.”

Their conversation was interrupted by the urgent entry of Samvarna, looking mildly out of breath. “Get ready immediately,” he said to Grtsamada. “There’s been a message from Prayaga. Kampilya was attacked last night as well.”