---
title: seven
id: 7
---

“Is there nothing I can say to change your mind?” Durdama asked, not enthused at the prospect of his guest’s departure. 

“My time here was always limited, dear friend,” Darsana replied. “Your hospitality has already turned what was supposed to be a stay of a few months to a full year. I hope to return some day, but for now I must move on.”

“Where will you go?”

“I think I shall make my way back to my land. Maybe Mulyasthana first, then Haradvara. After that, who knows.”

Durdama nodded, telling himself that this day had to come. But he’d grown fond of this strange visitor from Aryavarta who had saved his son’s life. “I can send a convoy with you,” he offered. “It’ll get you to Mulyasthana faster, and could come handy in the passes.”

Darsana shook his head in the negative. “That is most generous of you, Durdama, but I cannot oblige you any further. In any case, going fast is never my objective. I like to wander, maybe circle around, maybe even get lost sometimes.”

Durdama chuckled. “You are a strange character, Darsana. I don’t think I’m likely to meet another like you again.”

Darsana bowed, humbled by Durdama’s praise. “You are no less strange, Druhyu lord. It takes an interesting mind to give residence to a foreigner in his home.”

“Bah, what foreigner! My forefather was from Aryavarta too, as you well know. Besides, how could I not open my home to the man who saved my son?”

“I did what anyone else would have done.”

“But none else could, that’s the point! Only you possessed the knowledge that could save him, and your arrival was most timely. It put me in your debt.”

“A debt you have paid a hundred times over, my dear friend,” Darsana sincerely assured. He accepted Durdama’s invitation for a final dinner together, and that evening he dined in the halls of Gandhara for the last time. He’d come to Gandhara a year ago, intending only to make a short pit-stop before heading further north to Kubha- a city of no ordinary fame. Both Kubha and Gandhara came under the rule of Durdama Druhyu, as did the ancient town of Kapisa north of Kubha. Darsana had been drawn to this region by the fame of its soma. The soma plant grew freely in the mountains here, so abundant that it was often found along the hillside paths- ready for plucking. There were substitutes for this plant in Aryavarta, but Darsana was sure that this was the original soma, the plant the ancient maharshis had eulogised in high meter.  

Darsana set off early in the morning, under the first rays of the rising sun. Gandhara was located at an elevation, and to reach Mulyasthana from here he would have to navigate through deep ravines and high mountains. He could follow the Lorikdanai river upstream, letting it lead him through the passes and out on the other side. When he first took these paths, on his way to Gandhara, Darsana was not as familiar with the geography or history of the land. Now he knew better, in large part due to the learned scribes of Kubha. On his way back now, he felt that history travel with him. The maharshi Kashyapa himself had roamed these lands once, possibly finding inspiration for his compositions in the serene but tough landscape. A few generations after him, Adiraja Ikshaku had campaigned here, wishing to lead his people expanding into Dasavarsha. And many generations after that, this was the land where king Bharata had grown up, and later conquered.

There was a sense of liberation here that Darsana had never found in the stifling, humid forests of Aryavarta. Mountains opened into vast swathes of land, many rivers and streams running through it till as far as the eye could see. He had always wondered how the ancient, mythic armies of devas and asuras could have roamed the dense forests of Aryavarta. Observing the open fields here and the much more navigable mountains, he wondered if those primeval stories were based instead in these lands. He followed the Lorikdanai for two weeks, taking sustenance from the abundant grapes, apricots, pomegranates and other berries that grew in this region. When the Lorikdanai finally emerged through the mountains it bent upwards, headed for its origins further north.

He bid the river farewell there, performing a simple ritual by the bank to thank it for its guidance. From here he set a quicker pace, knowing the land ahead to be mostly uninteresting. Having left the Hemakuta range behind, he was now in the fertile basins of the Sindhu river. He arrived at Mulyasthana three days after emerging from the Hemakuta. To do so he had to cross the Asikni river first, but Mulyasthana was well connected to Gandhara and beyond by trade. As he neared the Asikni he fell on to established trade paths, and crossing the river was made easy by ferrying points on both sides. Even from a distance, Mulyasthana’s defining feature was easily visible. The grand Temple of Surya jutted high into the sky, its gold-coated dome gleaming under the light of the deity it was dedicated to. Mulyasthana’s organisation and governance structure never ceased to fascinate Darsana, used as he was to the world of tribes and rajans. The city had no singular ruler, no rajan who claimed divine or ancestral authority. It was instead governed by a council of elders, themselves representatives of the various vocations that inhabited the city- traders, farmers, metalsmiths, priests and more. It was a structure, he learnt, that had spread along the Sindhu to cities as far as Mohandvara in the south. 

Arriving at Mulyasthana from the west, Darsana passed through the city’s outer farms before entering the main grid- a network of roads running in the cardinal directions and intersecting at town squares. With its carefully laid drainage systems, meticulously planned roads and fortified walls, Mulyasthana was a planned town in every sense of the word- unlike the cities of Ganga and Yamuna. This town plan, the city’s priests maintained, was conceptualised by maharshi Kashyapa himself- and applied first to Kashyapura- now named Mulyasthana. And the Temple of Surya was the grand jewel in the plan, the magnificent citadel that attracted devotees of Surya from even foreign lands. At the temple gates Darsana introduced himself to the guards, hoping that the head priest would remember his name. Unlike the other greats of his time, maharshi Kashyapa established no schools and left behind no followers. His legacy was instead maintained by the Vasishtha school of rshis, which governed this temple in Mulyasthana. Darsana was invited inside after a while, led away from the main path where tourists and devotees thronged, to a narrow passage behind the main temple chamber. 

This was the rshis’ private ashrama, and head rshi Maghavan Vasishtha was waiting for Darsana when he arrived, his face breaking into a wide smile.

“Dear Darsana Kavya! How many years has it been?” Rshi Vasishtha pulled Darsana into an emphatic hug. 

“Four years I think, Maghavan,” Darsana replied, returning the affection. “And you haven’t changed a bit, have you? Still as young as ever.”

“Thanks only to the diet of your prescription, my dear friend,” Vasishtha replied. “Come, please seat yourself.” 

In the center of the ashrama’s courtyard was a massive banyan tree, one that Darsana knew dated from the time of maharshi Kashyapa. He seated himself under the banyan tree, washing his hands and feet with the pot of water an acolyte handed to him. Vasishtha waited patiently for him to finish, then asked- “So, what brings you to our humble town this time?”

“Must there always be a reason, Magha?”

“With you, yes.”

Darsana laughed in good nature, much less inhibited around Vasishtha than he was in Druhyu lands. “There honestly isn’t any this time,” he insisted. “I’m headed back to Haradvara, and I thought to take blessings at your temple first.”

Vasishtha’s smiling face turned into a frown. “Back to Haradvara? That might not be a good idea.”

Darsana returned the frown. “Why is that?”

“How long have you been away from Aryavarta? Disturbed times rise again, my friend. Only a week ago we received reports that the Bharata cities of Prayaga and Kashi were attacked.”

“What! By whom?”

Vasishtha shrugged. “Yadavas, Purus- who knows? But surely the Bharatas will retaliate. And closer to Haradvara, that old hand Hastina Puru gets more ambitious. He’s already claimed both Haradvara and Plaksha under the Puru banner. Armies will be mustered in Aryavarta all over again, and you’d rather not be caught amid their march.”

Darsana absorbed the information, still getting over the shock. The news Vasishtha shared changed his plans considerably, and Vasishtha was right about one thing- there was no point going to Haradvara. No, Darsana had to go somewhere else now- a place where he knew he’d be sorely needed.