---
title: '08'
id: 8
---

Haradvara- Gateway to the Gods. Once it was an idyllic ashrama established by Yati, elder son to late king Nahusha. Later it descended to Nahusha’s youngest grandson Puru, who made it his early capital and expanded the settlement. In its long history, Haradvara had seen many ups and downs, and even while its current state was flourishing, it was less than the city’s peak glory. The return of that glory seemed imminent now though, with the call of elephant matriarchs ringing out in the city for the first time in centuries. King Hastina Puru was going to reclaim the kingdom of his ancestors- was the buzz in the markets and docks. The elephants in the city were only for show, some muttered, asserting confidently that most of the force was hidden the forests so that enemy spies could not count them. The army was going to march to Prayaga, some said, while others said Kanyakubja would be conquered first. There were skeptics who wondered whether this Hastina’s claim was even legitimate, their doubts drowned by vivid descriptions of Hastina’s grey eyes- mark of Somavanshi lineage, and his affiliation to the Atri school- a sign that the rshis recognised his claim. 

What everyone could agree on though, was that this was a good thing. The lumberjack guild was running out of forests after centuries of tree-felling, and their resources could be more than replenished with trees from Naimisharanya. The fishermen, whose ancestors had once benefited from the bountiful Sarasvati, were happy at the prospect of rowing along a great river once again. The merchants and business guilds, having long heard of the markets in Kashi and Prayaga, imagined a day when all trade to Dasavarsha flowed through their channels. Even the farmers knew of the Ganga’s fertile plains, and wished for their sons and daughters to plough that easy soil over the hilly, part-rocky lands they had tilled all their lives. The warrior clans were happiest of all, feeling blessed for the opportunity to live like their glorious forefathers had and, if possible, die like them too- on the battlefield. An enthusiastic historian recalled the great Suryavanshi migration of the past, likening what now stirred in the Purus as a precursor to something similar. He was quickly reminded that the Suryavanshi migration in question had destroyed the Puru kingdom in the first place, and he felt significantly less enthusiastic after that.

But while the denizens of Haradvara engaged in optimistic fantasy, their king frowned at the latest news delivered to him inside the ancient but recently renovated Granite Palace- built centuries ago by king Rudrashva, second son of Puru. No sooner had he made concrete steps towards taking on the Bharatas, someone had beaten him to it. Both Kampilya and Kashi had been attacked, and Hastina had no idea who was behind this.  

“Who do you think it is?” He asked Mantim.

“The Kampilya attack was surely by Yadavas.”

“And what of the Kashi one?”

“We don’t know yet.” Mantim was apologetic. 

“Let’s find out,” Hastina commanded. “The Yadavas are known players. We will contend with them in the manner needed, when the time comes. But I want to know who these people in the east are.”

“Could it be the Suryavanshi?”

Hastina’s nostrils flared at the name. “Better so if them. Their time is up as well. Send riders out. I want to know who was behind the Kashi attacks.”

“Consider it done, my king.”