---
title: '09'
id: 9
---

Seven great maharshis were remembered in the annals of Aryavarta, and two of them were more enigmatic than the rest. When Grtsamada was a young boy, he’d listened fascinatedly to his mother relate the stories of how maharshis Angirasa and Bhrigus taught fire rituals to the ancient aryas. Both were still remembered as the original hotras- officiating priests. Later, as a teenager, Grtsamada began collecting their hymns and through them, learning the value of Agni to his people. He learnt about the Angirasa school too, established by the maharshi’s son Ghora. Ghora’s son in turn was remembered only by his patronymic- Ghaura, and the Angirasa school might have died out with them. But it was revived later by the great Puru rshis who became Angirasas themselves- Medhatithi, Kanva and Praskanva. Grtsamada had learnt their hymns too, and in the process understood the Angirasa school’s deep and ancient connection to Aryavarta.

So when he faced Prayaga’s rajpurohit now, head of the Angirasa school, Grtsamada felt as if he stared into history itself. Before him stood a man who symbolised an ancient lineage, a culture of fire-rituals that went back centuries into the past. Grtsamada placed solemn hands on Angirasa’s feet. “Thank you for meeting me at this late hour, rshi Angirasa,” he said. “It is my honour.”

The rajpurohit blessed Grtsamada and gave him a wide smile. “A Kasheya returns to this city after thirty years. The honour is all mine, Grtsamada. When I last saw you, you were no older than five. And now look at you.”

Grtsamada returned the smile uncertainly, not remembering the rajpurohit from his childhood. But it made sense when he thought about it, for as a child he’d frequented Prayaga- before Sunahotra’s fateful rebellion. 

“Come,” Angirasa said, gesturing for him to take a seat. The rajpurohit’s personal quarters were humble, populated only with the bare necessities. Unlike the rest of Prayaga’s royal premises, this hut was built entirely of mud, no doubt by the rajpurohit himself. Grtsamada felt confident of this, for it’s what he had done on the island too. “The rajan has been notified of your arrival, I’m sure?”

“Yes,” Grtsamada replied. “He’s called for an audience first thing in the morning.”

Angirasa’s eyes twinkled under the pale moonlight that lit his hut, a gentle smile resting on his face. “You must be tired from your travel, Kasheya. What brings you here, over rest and refreshment?”

It was a fair question, and Grtsamada realised he hadn’t prepared an explanation for himself. “I was drawn to you,” he said honestly. “There’s so much I want to ask you, though now that I’m here I don’t know where to start from.”

“Start with yourself,” Angirasa suggested. “Tell me about Grtsamada. What does the son of Kashi do? Who is he?”

Angirasa’s gaze was perceptive, penetrating deep into Grtsamada and reminding him of the force that had played with his mind when under Soma. “I study,” Grtsamada said, realising that he’d never asked himself these questions before. “I learn, I gather.”

“What do you study?”

“The hymns- the rchas of our land.”

“Why do you study them?”

Grtsamada faltered, not knowing how to answer that. “I…they represent our culture, don’t they? To learn them is to learn about Aryavarta.”

“The rchas know nothing about Aryavarta,” Angirasa said calmly. “They know only of the devas, of elemental forces, of nature. Maybe you seek something else, but you don’t know it yet?”

“I seek to collect it all,” Grtsamada said. “A single body of knowledge, containing all that our rshis have ever understood about devas, elemental forces, and nature.”

Angirasa smiled at that, nodding approvingly. “That’s more definitive! Good, then this is why you study the rchas. To compile and organise them?”

“Yes!” Grtsamada was excited. “A single veda, unifying the knowledge of all rshi schools!”

“And how may I help you in this, Kasheya?”

“Teach me your hymns, rajpurohit. As head of the Angirasa school, you would know many Agni hymns I’m unaware of, and their ritual methodology.”

Angirasa’s gentle smile disappeared. “I’m afraid that’s not possible, Kasheya. Our hymns and rituals are taught to students only. To learn them you have to submit yourself to the school.”

Grtsamada was afraid of that. He folded his palms together. “Forgive me, rajpurohit, but I cannot do that. To maintain my objectivity, I cannot subscribe to any one school in particular.”

“I understand. But that’s also why I cannot help you. I do know someone who could, though.”

Grtsamada raised his eyebrows, intrigued.

“When I was a young disciple in the Angirasa school, I had a classmate, bright and curious as you are. He learnt our ways, but then tried to chart his own path. He brought innovations to the rituals our school couldn’t accept, and the head of the time exiled the student. He’s no longer bound by our school, and you might be able to persuade him to teach you a few things.”

“Who is he, and where can I find him?”

“He’s called Dirghatapasa,” Angirasa said, “And on most mornings you’ll find him at the confluence ghats, conducting rituals for willing devotees.”