---
title: '11'
id: 11
---

The thirty yojanas distance between Kampilya and Prayaga, when made at an idle pace, took eight days to complete. Kampilya to Prayaga downstream along the Ganga was easier, as boats were helped by the river’s natural flow. Samvarna led a mounted cavalry blazing along the Ganga’s banks, making the journey from Prayaga to Kampilya in less than five days. His hometown, Kanyakubja, was but a day’s travel south of Kampilya. Growing up, Samvarna had imagined a grand future where Kanyakubja and Kampilya had expanded into each other, forming a vast urban conglomerate where trade and prosperity converged from all corners. He was disabused of this dream in his twenties, when he saw rajan Ajamidha withdraw into a shell and Kampilya languish under the diminished attention. Samvarna knew that the day would come when an enemy tribe dared to attack the town, he just didn’t imagine it would all happen at once. He had his spies across Aryavarta, and knew well of the ambitions of a certain Hastina Puru in the north. But he had not counted on the Anavas and Yadavas finding strength at the same time, and he feared now that his janapada was pressed from all sides.

He and his men camped across Kampilya for the night, finding shelter in the trees that lined the Ganga’s west bank. There was activity in the town throughout the night, indicating that the Yadava soldiers there expected an attack any time. This did not surprise Samvarna. The Yadavas were reputed to be smart military strategists, and of the many faults blamed on them complacence was not one. Yet the sparse posting puzzled him. Did the Yadavas not intend to keep Kampilya, once captured? If not, what was the whole point? And if yes, then the hundred-odd men they’d posted would clearly not be enough for a Bharata counter-attack. Late in the night, when he overheard one of his soldiers comment that it was high time elephants were posted in Kampilya that Samvarna had an insight. The Yadava attack at Kampilya was intended to gauge the Bharata strength and resolve. Would the Bharatas retake Kampilya immediately? Would they waver? Would they present their full might, elephant cavalries and all, or would they commit the bare minimum? No doubt these were the questions the Yadavas wondered, and Samvarna realised he could use this to his advantage. An urgent missive was sent racing to Kanyakubja in the middle of the night, and closer to dawn half his force was sent riding north. 

The next morning was spent restlessly hoping that the courier to Kanyakubja hadn’t been intercepted. Near noon the advance scout returned and confirmed it- the message had been received. He and the men skipped lunch, for when the contingent of elephants was sighted by afternoon the time for battle had arrived. They crept slightly northwards, where a makeshift crossing had been constructed the night before. They swiftly crossed the river, making it to the other side just as the signal arrived from the Kanyakubja contingent. Adrenaline coursed through Samvarna when he heard the first pachyderm war cry thunder through the air. The Yadava presence in Kampilya was immediately set into panic, and soon the elephants from Kanyakubja came into their view. Twenty-two mighty matriarchs thumped urgently across the landscape, dust, roots and grass flying in their wake. A few Yadava archers helplessly took aim from Kampilya’s towers, and with their attention turned south Samvarna and his men made their own attack. 

As instructed, the remaining half of Samvarna’s force waited till the Yadavas realised that they were under attack from two sides. The Yadava attention further diverted, the remaining force charged into Kampilya from the east, having circled around over the previous night. Hundred panicked Yadava soldiers fell under Bharata attack from three sides, and the Ganga closed their escape from the fourth. It did not take long for the Yadavas to lose their morale, and by the time the elephants entered Kampilya Samvarna’s men had overpowered the enemy. There was a time when Samvarna would have shown mercy, and differentiated between a commander and the common soldier. But with the attacks on Kampilya and Kashi, the uparajan knew that the time for mercy was past. He took no surrender, every Yadava soldier brought to his end save one. 

“I want you to run back to your masters,” Samvarna told the shocked survivor before setting him free. “Tell them that the Bharata janapada takes no prisoners. Not anymore. Tell them of the strength you saw here today, and let them know that we now stand prepared.”

Then the uparajan bowed to his soldiers and asked forgiveness. “No man should do what I did here today- ending the lives of men who were willing to surrender. That sin is on me, not on you, and may Indra ensure this never happens to you.”