---
title: '12'
id: 12
---

A specific caricature of forest-dwelling hermits was common across Aryavarta- long and shaggy hair, unkempt beard, wild-red eyes, ash-smeared forehead and an emaciated appearance. These were said to be the traits of a typical forest hermit, and it was a look that Aristanemi had tried to adopt all his life. But the man Grtsamada now faced seemed to be the one who’d inspired it all in the first place. Dirghatapasa was the forest-hermit from everyone’s imagination, down to the cavities visible between his ribs. Grtsamada couldn’t be sure whether the man’s eyes were red from ash and soot or from ganjika, but they were redder than any eyes he’d seen before. 

“You’re the Kasheya,” Dirghatapasa intoned, his voice surprisingly sonorous. 

“And you are rshi Dirghatapasa?”

“Not rshi. Did your grand Bharata council not fail? I thought the Kasheyas had left Prayaga.”

Word spread fast in the city, Grtsamada realised. After leaving Ajamidha’s hall he’d almost boarded the boat and sailed for Kashi right away. But rajpurohit Angirasa’s words came back to him when his rage subsided- find Dirghatapasa. He bid Ketumana farewell at the confluence ghats, resolving to spend another night in Prayaga to find the exiled Angirasa rshi. The task was not as difficult as he expected. Dirghatapasa’s name was well known in Prayaga’s ghats and markets, his characteristic appearance lending itself to easy description. 

“The council did indeed fail,” Grtsamada confirmed. “But I could not leave before meeting you.”

There was no curiosity or expression in Dirghatapasa’s red eyes. “What for?”

“Rajpurohit Angirasa told me about you. I wish to converse with you and, if possible, learn from you.”

“I am no teacher.” Dirghatapasa was terse, but there was something well-constructed in his pronunciation. He spoke in the same vein as one recited the prayers, making his dialect sound more refined than the prakrits of Prayaga and Kashi. 

Despite the brevity, Grtsamada was already intrigued. “But you possess knowledge nonetheless. Perhaps I could glean some of it.”

Dirghatapasa’s refined speech made his skepticism sound even more pronounced- “A royal member of the Bharata line has something to glean from me?” 

Dirghatapasa was a forest hermit, and Grtsamada did not expect this to go easy. He ignored the cynicism in the man’s tone and replied using the common prakrit word for a forest dweller- “Lineage does nothing to quell curiosity, aranyak, and mine has been burning for many years. It has set me upon a project where, if rajpurohit Angirasa was right, I can learn much from you.”

For the first time, there was expression in Dirghatapasa’s eyes. Some of the red in them had dissipated now, and Grtsamada saw the hint of curiosity shine through. “