---
title: thirteen
id: 13
---

The Ganga gushed ferociously around this bend, its waters strengthened by numerous tributaries having joined upstream, both before and after Kashi. At such velocities and with sharp turns, Hastina knew that rivers were prone to periodic flooding. This made inhabitants of such lands a resilient, pragmatic people. He saw it in their eyes as he navigated the settlement, led by one of his hosts- a young boy no more than sixteen or so. The boy had introduced himself as Telanga, youngest son to the Anava rajan- Bali. He’d welcomed Hastina cordially enough, announcing that his brothers expected the visit. Hastina was not surprised at that. The settlement held enough evidence to the Anavas’ military character, and such a character always included spies. Dense forest covered it all around, and suitably it had taken Hastina two months to find it. The reddish mud still covered tree stumps at places, indicating that this clearing by the bank was man-made. Marking the westernmost point of their realm, the Anavas called this settlement Pataligrama. 

Hastina knew his history, but he was still surprised when he saw the two Anava brothers that faced him inside the hut when he entered. Unlike people in the rest of Aryavarta, and unlike their brother Telanga even, they had the slanted eyes that Hastina knew belonged beyond the Himalaya. It was clear that they got this reaction a lot, for the elder among them explained as he greeted Hastina- “The sons of Bali are born to different mothers, and Vanga and I were born to a mother far east of here- in forests Aryavarta does not know of yet.” He was Anga then, the eldest son of Bali. Hastina guessed that Anga was around his own age, and Vanga did not look much younger. And yet Telanga the youngest was but a boy- indicating that rajan Bali’s virility extended well into old age. 

“Thank you for welcoming me in your village, Anava brothers,” Hastina said earnestly. The tribes’ respective founding fathers, Anu and Puru, had been brothers after all. 

“Pataligrama is open to any who comes without malice in their heart,” Anga declared, giving credit to his spies when he added- “And you were kind enough to announce your arrival in the forest days ago.”

“Your men are competent,” Hastina acknowledged, wondering if the taut atmosphere was his imagination. 

“But certainly a Puru rajan such as yourself is not out on a casual tour,” Vanga observed. “So what brings you to our village?”

“I was impressed to hear of the attack you mounted on Kashi,” Hastina confessed. “I only wish I’d known of it in advance. I could have added my strength to yours and we would have taken the town together.” 

“A generous offer,” Anga admitted, looking unmoved nonetheless. “But taking Kashi was never our aim. Our realms are east of here, Puru rajan, and vast enough for both our people and our ambition. The attack on Kashi was merely an arrow in the dark, its purpose to illuminate the threats around us. What we saw assures us that Pataligrama can defend our borders.”

Hastina screwed his face into a disbelieving scoff. “You’re telling me you willingly accept Pataligrama as your border?”

“The Ganga gives us a natural border anyway. And as I said- it’s to the east we look.”

This interaction was not going anything like Hastina planned. He thought he would appeal to old family alliances and acquire Anava strength for his own mission. But the sons of Bali surprised him with their nonchalance. Hastina insisted- “And yet with your attack on Kashi, the Bharatas will now look to you.”

“The Bharatas are estranged among themselves from what we here, and I hate for you to have me repeat myself, Puru rajan- Pataligrama can defend our borders.”

Hastina tried to hide his exasperation. “Look- whether you look east or elsewhere, Aryavarta still expands around you. Sooner or later you will face the Bharatas, Suryavanshis or even others. An alliance between us is mutually beneficial- and the ties between our tribes ancient.”

The sons of Bali chuckled in unison. “Ties too ancient to even remember well,” Anga spoke for them. “How does the story go? Five sons of Nahusha for five parts of Aryavarta? Or was it the sons of Yayati? I can never remember.”

The Puru rajan was an old hand. He returned the Anavas’ dry smile. “You are six brothers too, are you not? We will see how long you stay satisfied with your realms.”

“Careful now, Puru,” Vanga dropped the honorific of rajan this time. “Don’t say something to strain our welcome.”

Hastina nodded, realising that he’d hit a dead end here. The Anavas would not involve themselves in Aryavarta, at least for now. In his fight against the Bharatas, only the Yadavas could ally with him now. And this was without accounting for the Suryavanshis, already his dynastic enemies. 