---
title: '14'
id: 14
---


Mitrasaha Kausalya knew the urgency of the message he carried, but he allowed himself to enjoy the journey from Ayodhya to Prayaga. He’d never been outside Suryavanshi realms before this, and he took the opportunity to familiarise himself with the rivers, lakes, streams and forests surrounding his tribe’s realm. The river Gomati, hidden by dense forest on either side, marked the Suryavanshi realm’s western border. South of his position, on the Gomati’s western bank, lay the town his father founded- Kosala. If the Gomati was the Suryavanshi realm’s western border, then the river Sarayu was the eastern. On its banks lay the capital city founded by his grandfather six decades ago- Ayodhya. Ayodhya, the impregnable fortress of a resurgent solar tribe. Once, Mitrasaha was told, his ancestors had been kings of Aryavarta. Vast cities like Vinasana, Avisari, Rajavasa and Harayupa gleamed on the banks of Sindhu, Sarasvati and their tributaries- original home to Mitrasaha’s people.  Few of those cities survived now, and those that did were shadow relics of their past glory. Those peak days lay centuries in the past, his tribe now surviving reclusively in the forest, among rivers the rest of Aryavarta was yet to colonise. 

That time was about to change. With the establishment of Ayodhya, his people had experienced six decades of stable and uninterrupted growth. Hidden from the sight of powerful tribes like the Bharatas and Purus, towns like Govanda and Sravasti flourished. The Suryavansha was ready to strike out again, staking its claim on Aryavarta as was its right. But it was never wise to make enemies of everyone, and the Bharata tribe had historically done the solar people no wrong. Thus king Ayuddha had chosen it as an ally, and his grandson Mitrasaha was to extend the hand of friendship. 

Mitrasaha had never been to these forests, but they felt no different to the ones he was familiar with back home. He’d informed himself from old records of the known river paths and charted a route cutting south-west through the forest- expecting to arrive at Prayaga from its north-east. Streams meandered in the forest, forcing him to take a more twisted route than he’d have liked. He estimated his journey to take less than two days, but it was three nights after he left Ayodhya that the city of Prayaga came into view at the distant horizon. For a capital city it was sparsely fortified, far less than Ayodhya at least. Mitrasaha was able to enter the city easily, citizens unhesitatingly pointing him towards the royal family’s quarters when asked. Was this truly home of the Bharatas- Aryavarta’s most powerful tribe, founded by the great king Bharata? At the royal quarters’ gates Mitrasaha was finally stopped by a team of guards. He revealed his identity and requested audience with the king. Here too he was surprised when he received no questions, only curious stares. One of the guards simply led him inside, not even frisking him for weapons. Within an hour of his arrival at Prayaga, Mitrasaha stood before Ajamidha, encountering none of the trouble he’d anticipated.

“I salute you in respect, king Ajamidha Sauhotri of the Bharatas,” Mitrasaha declared like he’d rehearsed. “I’m crown prince Mitrasaha Kausala of the Suryavansha.”

Ajamidha and the men around him looked amused. “King. Crown Prince. We do not use such titles here, young man. I am a simple rajan of my janapada.”

Mitrasaha was surprised. Ajamidha was supposed to be the elder grandson of king Bharata. Why did he not carry the same title? He realised that Suryavanshi intelligence on the Bharatas might not be entirely up to date. “Rajan Ajamidha,” he corrected himself. “I am here on behalf of my grandfather, king Ayuddha, to deliver a proposal.”

Ajamidha was intrigued. He hadn’t thought about the Suryavanshis for decades. He vaguely remembered their history- founded by Ikshvaku centuries ago, they originally inhabited the Sindhu and Sarasvati. Then those rivers dried up and they migrated eastwards. If Ajamidha remembered his lessons correctly, this eastward migration through Aryavarta had sent the Puru kingdom of that time into disarray. But all of that was generations before Bharata even, and Ajamidha was surprised to learn that the tribe still retained old titles such as king. King of what, he wondered. Aloud, he asked- “What proposal would that be?”

“The Pancha Gana amass again, rajan Ajamidha,” Mitrasaha declared without preamble. “To the east, our spies are sure that the Anavas have established a foothold on the Ganga. To the west, Purus and Yadavas find power once again. We can face this threat together, as allied tribes.”

Ajamidha glanced at his uparajan, silently acknowledging that Samvarna had been right all these years. Purus, Yadavas, Suryavanshis- these were names Ajamidha had allowed himself to forget. But Mitrasaha’s arrival now brought them back to life. Samvarna sensed his rajan’s mind and said- “A threat we’ve come to perceive as well. Only two months ago Kashi was attacked by an Anava raiding party. And to the west, Kampilya was briefly taken by Yadavas.”

“Then you feel the same urgency we do,” Mitrasaha said, not knowing who Samvarna was or how to address him. 

“But I daresay, with no disrespect to you or your tribe, that the threat is greater for us,” Samvarna declared, testing the guest. “None even knows of Suryavanshi cities in the forest, while Prayaga and Kashi stand in open invitation to all of Aryavarta.”

Mitrasaha had expected this. Large powers rarely thought much of smaller ones, at least initially. “That’s what brings me here. After many decades of a hidden existence, my people are ready to declare their presence to all Aryavarta. Soon we will turn the attention of Anavas, Purus and Yadavas to us as much as is it on you. And their spies need only take one look at Ayodhya to feel the desire to capture it.”

Mitrasaha was right. Unknown to the Suryavanshi, Samvarna had been keeping an eye on them for years. He knew of the old king Ayuddha who gave his people a new capital, or of the king’s son and no less a founder himself- Kosala. Samvarna had even spied on Kosala from close quarters, many years ago. That’s how he could confirm that Mitrasaha was indeed Kosala’s son- such was the resemblance. More than a city, Ayodhya was a fortress, bounded on all sides by a deep and wide moat, itself protected by high walls with longbow stations. The Suryavansha had a long history in Aryavarta, during which it had made more enemies than anyone could count. They were a proud, martial and brave people- valuable allies in the war that Samvarna knew was coming. Ajamidha’s eyes were on him, and Samvarna realised that the rajan wanted his opinion.

“Perhaps this is an omen,” Samvarna mused. “Possible allies appear on our horizon almost as soon as enemies do. The Suryavansha is an honourable janapada, its Vasishtha rshis the keepers of some of Aryavarta’s oldest prayers. I would accept their friendship, my rajan.”

The elder paters Dvimidha and Purumidha were silent, seeming to agree with Samvarna’s take. Even Brhat said nothing, but Tritsu started intently at the guest. Something about this did not feel right to him. Only a month ago they had failed to re-establish a link with their own family- the Kashi line. And now they were considering an alliance with this Suryavansha. Who were the Suryavanshi anyway? Not as familiar with the history of Aryavarta as his elders were, Tritsu had no context for the solar tribe. He knew not legendary names like Ikshvaku, Vaivasvat Manu, Prithu, Mandhatra or Sindhudvipa. He perceived Mitrasaha as the young scion of some fledgling tribe, not even prominent enough to be called a janapada. Every political alliance had to be of mutual benefit to the involved parties. Of what benefit was this alliance to the Bharata janapada?

“My uparajan speaks wisely, as always,” Ajamidha finally declared, making Mitrasaha realise who Samvarna was and look at him with renewed respect. Ajamidha continued, addressing Mitrasaha directly- “Tell you grandfather that I accept his gracious proposal with humility and gratitude, young crown prince.”

Mitrasaha bowed, folding his palms together in acknowledgment. “The gratitude is mine, Rajan Ajamidha. But I have one more request, of a personal nature this time.”

“Go ahead.”

“I would like to visit your grand city- Kashi. There are prayers there that rshi Vasishtha would love to know of, and it would be my honour to meet the rshis Dhanvantari and Grtsamada.”

The mention of Kashi sent a tense ripple through the room, as it always did, but Ajamidha chuckled despite himself. “You use for us titles we do not ourselves, young man. Dhanvantari and Grtsamada are no rshis.”

Mitrasaha frowned, feeling uncertain again. He had never met either of them, but the rshis Dhanvantari and Grtsamada held high fame in Ayodhya. Years ago, rshi Dhanvantari had even visited the city and exchanged ideas with rshi Vasishtha. And was rshi Grtsamada not a supreme compiler of prayers old and new? The lack of knowledge made him feel constricted. “I am unsure of what to say to that, rajan. The sons of Kashi are revered only as rshis in my land.”

Tritsu was not surprised when Samvarna said by way of explanation- “Dhanvantari has been to Ayodhya in his travels.” Always the uparajan said things that demonstrated to Tritsu that he knew more about Aryavarta’s current affairs than Ajamidha knew or even cared. Tritsu did not know much about Dhanvantari- Ketumana’s father- but Samvarna’s statement seemed to explain it to the elder paters, who nodded comprehendingly. 

“You are our ally now, Mitrasaha Kausala,” Ajamidha said, “So there are things you should know about our janapada. The line of Prayaga and the line of Kashi are allies no more. If you wish to visit Kashi on a personal matter, it is no business of ours. But as our ally, if the Suryavansha makes a political interaction with them- I would like to know of it.”

A barrage of questions flooded Mitrasaha’s mind at that declaration, and his suspicions were now doubly confirmed- Suryavanshi intelligence on the Bharatas was woefully out of date. For a moment Mitrasaha even thought of Dhanvantari. Did the Bharata rshi visit Ayodhya years ago to plant misinformation? Wouldn’t he have told King Ayuddha of this rift between the Bharata lines? Or was the rift more recent? “Forgive me for my ignorance, rajan Ajamidha, but when did this happen?”

Ajamidha frowned at his visitor, wondering for the first time how much he really knew about the Bharata janapada. “Thirty years ago, on the day grand patriarch Bharata was stepping down,” he said simply, unsure of how much to reveal to Mitrasaha.

Mitrasaha did not respond, Ajamidha’s reply doing nothing to help his perplexity. “Rajan Ajamidha, I would request to be told the complete story, but if what you say is true then the situation is even more urgent. With the Pancha Gana rising, there is no time for internal conflicts. Alternately- if the Kashi line is your enemy, what is to stop it from allying with another enemy against you?”

“You know little about us, Mitrasaha,” Samvarna said, “So you might not understand it when I tell you that there is no possibility of the Kashi line taking arms against us.”

“I wouldn’t be too sure, uparajan,” Dvimidha finally spoke up. “They did so once before.”

Tritsu was getting good at reading Samvarna, and he detected suppressed frustration on the uparajan’s face when he replied- “Is it wise to discuss these things in front of the guest, elder pater?”

“Enough,” Ajamidha said, not wanting the uparajan and his brothers to start arguing again. “Kashi was attacked. Kampilya was attacked. We retook it, but the threat has only started. We tried to amend this once, but the failure was mine. I let Grtsamada and Ketumana walk away from our city, our rift unrepaired. Now this guest arrives and sees clearly what I am too blind to- Aryavarta changes, and this is no time for internal conflicts.”

The elder paters might have disagreed, but they did not voice it aloud against their older brother. Tritsu looked to his father for reaction, but Brhat too was silent at Ajamidha’s declaration. Only Samvarna seemed happy, a look he exchanged briefly with Tritsu. “I will bring them here again,” Samvarna promised. “Leave that to me, rajan.”

Ajamidha nodded, a sense of renewed intent washing over him. For years he had wallowed in his shell, shaming his forefathers by letting their old enemies rise again. Leave Kashi alone, leave Kashi alone- Bharata’s last command. *I will disobey your command, grandfather*, Ajamidha thought to himself. *But not in the way that you feared. I will reunite your lines, your janapada. And I will reclaim the Aryavarta that once both feared and revered you.*

An Aryavarta that, if Mitrasaha was to be believed, remembered Bharata as a king.