---
title: fifteen
id: 15
---


“Puffing that quite a bit these days, aren’t you,” Grtsamada commented as he approached, eyes going to the chillum in Aristanemi’s hands. He sat next to his brother and dangled his legs off the dock, following his gaze to the river bank ahead.

Aristanemi refilled his chillum and tapped it on the ground. “We all have our poisons.”

“Some more harmful than others.”

Aristanemi smirked. “Some to self and some to others,” he corrected.

“How does my poison harm others?”

“Indoctrination, dogma, orthodoxy. Need I say more?”

Grtsamada sighed. “We’ve always looked at things different, Nemi. I know what I have dedicated my life to, do you?”

Aristanemi had no response to that. He’d wandered aimlessly through life for thirty-two years, finding no purpose in it. “You remember the Yavana story brother Dhanvantari told us when he returned from one of his travels?”

Grtsamada frowned and tilted his head, trying to recall. “You mean the one about Sasivasa?”

Aristanemi nodded. “To the Yavanas Sasivasa’s story represents hubris- that fate comes calling to those who try to rise too high. But I’ve always thought about it differently. I think of his life, eternally fated to roll that boulder up the hill in the morning, only to have it fall back down by nightfall. What a meaningless, futile life.”

“That’s one way of looking at it. Meaning does not come from without, it comes from within. There is meaning in rolling the boulder up the hill, if only one looks for it.”

“You’re not wrong,” Aristanemi conceded. “And yet I can’t help but think about the absurdity of Sasivasa’s fate, and how that is but all our fate as well.”

“I don’t follow.”

“Isn’t Sasivasa’s story an allegory for life itself?” Aristanemi explained. “How high all of us try to fly, how lofty the ambitions we weave. But what does all of it eventually come to? Age and history swallows all, nothing remains.”

Aristanemi was ponderous when he said that, but Grtsamada chuckled. “Lay off the chillum awhile, brother. The ganjika has your mind troubled.”

“My mind has always been troubled, Grtsamada,” Aristanemi confessed. “I disagree with your ambitions, yes, but I respect that you have them. Even brother Dhanvantari, with his obsession with herbs, potions and faraway lands, has a purpose in his life. And you have your Veda. What do I have? Am I not like Sasivasa, every day of my life a meaningless rolling of boulders?”

Grtsamada stared at his cousin, trying to sense the pain behind his words. Aristanemi had always led a lonely life, orphaned at a young age and neglected by Kashi- whose attention was first solely on Dhanvantari and, after his abdication, on Ketumana. While Grtsamada immersed himself in the elaborate rituals, prayers and wisdom of Aryavarta, Aristanemi took to wasting his time with ganjika and soma. “You said it yourself just now, Nemi. We are all like Sasivasa, we all roll boulders up the hill. But that makes life a little easier, doesn’t it? We have a simple decision to make- play this absurd, futile game with meaning, or don’t play it at all. Sasivasa was cursed by the Yavana gods, but we aren’t. We are not compelled to roll the boulder.”

Grtsamada’s explanation finally brought a wry smile to Aristanemi’s grim face. “If I didn’t know you any better, brother, I’d think you were advocating suicide.”

Grtsamada did not understand. “What do you mean?”

Aristanemi would have explained, but they were disturbed by a messenger from the rajanalaya- mother Kashi had requested their presence. “There’s much to probe here, brother,” Aristanemi said as he packed up his chillum. “We’ll pick it up again another day.”

Rajani Kashi awaited them with Ketumana at the rajanalaya courtyard, exclaiming with scorn- “Ah, here come the grandsons of Sunahotra- such able bearers of his name. Prayaga calls for us again, like one does a pet dog. How do you think the Saunahotri should respond?”

“There’s been a message from uparajan Samvarna,” Ketumana explained to his uncles, keeping his tone low in deference to Kashi’s angered state. “He requests us back for a second attempt at reunification.”

Grtsamada was skeptical. “So they can insult us again?”

“Exactly what I said,” Kashi was happy to see Grtsamada agreeing with her. “But uparajan Ketumana here feels otherwise. Why don’t you tell them, Ketu?”

This was Ketumana’s last chance to convince his elders. “The last attempt was a failure, I know that, uncle Grtsamada. But even you know that uparajan Samvarna was for the alliance, then and now. If he sends us this message it means he has rajan Ajamidha’s consent. Something must have changed, maybe there was another attack.”

“And now they need us,” Kashi completed.

“And we need them, grandmother. How long before the next Anava attack, and how many raiders this time?”

“Ketumana has a point,” Aristanemi said, surprising himself. He was usually not even present at such meetings, let alone participate in them.

Kashi apparently felt the same way. “No one asked you, Nemi. I can smell the ganjika on you from here. Are you ever sober?”

Ignoring the jibe, Aristanemi decided to double-down. “The past does nothing but hold us back, aunt Kashi. You are not the only one who lost a father that fateful day thirty years ago.”

Kashi fumed. Aristanemi had an annoying air of nonchalance about him as he said that, and it always boiled her blood when he called her aunt, not mother- as if to iterate that he thought nothing more of her. 

Grtsamada tried to ease the tension. “We all lost family that day.”

“And I wish to lose no more,” Kashi declared.

“Then let us reunite, grandmother. Our strength and safety lie in numbers. Together, the Bharata janapada would be the largest fighting force in Aryavarta. None dare raise sword against us then.”

Kashi realised that she was at the cusp of an important choice. To resist Ketumana now risked alienating him, but to give in meant sending him to Prayaga once again. But at least Ketumana had returned safely the last time- while she was not sure what he would do if she rejected him now. The safer choice then, if she hoped to retain her grandson, was to let him go to Prayaga. Her decision made, she decided to probe Ketumana’s mind- “If the janapada is one, who would be rajan? Ajamidha, or me? And after that- Brhat and then Tritsu? Or you?”

Ketumana pondered that in silence, not having given it thought before. From the night the Anavas attacked Kashi, he’d fallen into a natural deference to the leadership of Samvarna and Tritsu- who he looked at as an elder brother. He realised now that he had no problem with the idea of Tritsu as rajan, but could he confess this to Kashi?

The rajan of Kashi read her grandson’s thoughts. “The eldest has no natural right over the position of rajan,” she explained. “Your right to the Bharata janapada is as strong as Tritsu’s- never forget that, Ketu. Your grand-uncle and great-grandfather lost their lives fighting for this right.”

“Yes, grandmother,” Ketumana said, knowing better than to argue.

“And you,” Kashi said to her son. “Are you going to be an assertive Saunahotri this time, or will you return from Prayaga chastened again?”

The question was rhetorical, so it was Aristanemi who responded- “I will go too.”

“There’s no need for that,” Kashi snapped. “Prayaga does not fume with ganjika.”

That was meant to be a barb, but Aristanemi brushed it off with a statement of his own, voiced airily as he took leave- “A situation only I can change.”
