---
title: '16'
id: 16
---



An upstream journey from Kashi to Prayaga on the Ganga was possible only through powerful rowboats that Kashi did not possess. The retinue made its journey on foot, following the Ganga’s northern banks along the relatively sparse tree line. Deeper in, away from the bank, the forest turned impossibly dark- inhabited by all manners of wild animals and tribes. Among these forests, Aristanemi knew, also lay countless mystic ashramas home to the people known as *shramanas*. Aristanemi had never been for rituals and prayers himself, but he rated his understanding of Sanskrit highly. He knew the word to be derived from the root *shrama- *to toil and labour. Shramanas were so called because they dedicated their lives, so they claimed, to the intense labour of finding salvation. What salvation actually meant Aristanemi never learnt, for all he saw them ever do was spend time under the effect of soma. He’d even shared soma with a few shramanas once, understanding enough of their worldview to know that they rejected the traditional prayers of Aryavarta- the prayers so dear to Grtsamada.

The world would not be conquered by grand altars at the feet of nature, the shramanas claimed. Elaborate rituals and intricate prayers, directed externally as they were, represented a vain and misdirected attempt. Real conquest, real victory, the shramana worldview insisted, lay not in the external world but in the internal. Aristanemi remembered the shramana’s words as clear as day- *Devas, asuras, aryas, daityas; these are real only inside our heads. They represent the worlds we can all create. Which world manifests in physicality depends on you.*

An ideology that one readily understood after a single soma experience, even if one eventually intellectualised disagreement with it. Grtsamada had never experienced soma, his austerity allowing no room for indulgence of any kind. Aristanemi thought this to be a tragedy, for the utterly mystic experience of soma was one he felt everyone should have at least once in their lives. Faced with that great inner majesty, even real life often seemed to pale in colour. There were times under the effect of soma when Aristanemi could have bet that the worlds that consumed him were more real than the physical one that only confounded him. How could people concern themselves with mundane things such as war, trade, profits, marriages and rivalries when profundity awaited only a bowl of soma away?

Lost in this reverie, Ketumana’s cry came to Aristanemi from afar. At the second call it became urgent, now sounding from nearer. It was at the third cry that Aristanemi fully returned to the present, where he saw the company in chaos. Men ran at them from all sides, spears darting from the forest’s darkness. Aristanemi was not a military man, and in the moment he struggled to unsheathe his sword. An assailant was upon him before that, his own sword curving in a lethal swipe that Aristanemi avoided by reflexively falling to the ground and rolling away. He rushed himself back to his feet and surveyed around, pulling the sword out smoothly this time. The assailant grinned at him with vicious eyes, having seen his amateurish behaviour. Guiding arrow fire from the walls of Kashi was one thing, but Aristanemi was not used to hand-to-hand armed combat. He tried to remember the training he scoffed in his younger days, donning what he thought was the right stance and grip. From a corner of his mind came the realisation- he could die here. 

The assailant charged confidently, making his own conclusions about Aristanemi’s attempt to look like a warrior. Aristanemi backed up, bumping into a tree where he knew he had to make his stand. The assailant’s grin was triumphant already, his sword pointed at Aristanemi’s throat as he ran towards him. It wasn’t training but instinct that made Aristanemi step aside and swipe his sword wildly. The assailant was caught mid-step, the sword striking between his armour and helmet to cut into the traps. Sensing a window, Aristanemi withdrew and struck again, this time aiming at the head. The helmet fell off, and Aristanemi kicked in the gut, sending his attacker falling back. Feeling clumsy as he did so, Aristanemi walked to his fallen opponent and pushed his sword right down his forehead, giving to him a swift end. Taking a moment to ensure none else charged at him, Aristanemi fell back against the tree and slumped- this was the first time he had taken a life. 

He scanned the carnage around him for Grtsamada, spotting his cousin in a protective circle formed by Ketumana and other soldiers. Adrenaline now coursed through Aristanemi, and for the first time he felt rage- the kind that pulsed through him and made him feel invincible. He slashed and bellowed his way towards Ketumana, more unaware of the risk to himself than knowingly uncaring of it. It was a blind attack that took the enemy warriors by surprise, their infantry beating a retreat into the forest line that hid their archers. Ketumana and Grtsamada stared- the sight of Aristanemi belying every expectation. His long hair, dense beard and wide musculature suddenly looked apt on the battlefield- the kind that held enemy soldiers back by sheer hint of formidability. “The son of Shala…,” Grtsamada uttered, his eyes in a daze. 

Born merely two years before his death, Shala the son of Sunahotra had named his son Aristanemi- a foreboding thunderbolt. This son of Shala lived up to his name in the forest, his adrenaline pushing him into the tree line where he faced the archers directly, soon joined by Bharata soldiers emboldened by his bravado. The Kashi Bharatas’ panicked defense morphed into confident attack, their assailants wavering under the rally. It took another hour for the battle’s conclusion to be established, Ketumana setting his men to follow and finish the retreaters. One was caught almost immediately, looking unabashed when he was brought before the uparajan of Kashi.

Ketumana wasted no time- “What banner do you serve?”

“The Puru- as my forefathers have always done,” was the defiant reply.

“Hastina Puru?” Ketumana asked, frowning. He’d heard that name from Samvarna.

“Only and none else.”

The uparajan fell silent, involuntarily glancing at Aristanemi. There was one thing Ketumana had learnt tonight- Aristanemi was more than he showed. 

Aristanemi comprehended the gaze. He’d discovered something within him tonight that even he did not know existed, and the silent stares he received from cousin, nephew and soldiers alike were nothing compared to the loud beat of his own heart. For the first time in his life, Aristanemi understood what life might have been life for his father and forefathers- dedicated to war and combat. He understood now, having sought this comprehension forever, why Shala and Sunahotra might have rebelled to retain the one spoil of their dedication- Kashi. 

“What was your objective?” Aristanemi asked the captive. 

The Puru soldier was unafraid when he looked to Ketumana. “Wipe out the Kashi line.”

“You know who I am?” Ketumana asked.

“Young as a boy, but commands all men around him,” the captive said. “It wasn’t hard to spot you.”

Aristanemi saw his nephew’s eyes narrow, the real world of politics, family lines and dynasties feeling alive to him for the first time. He saw not Ketumana but the great-grandson of Sunahotra, and the descendant of grand patriarch Bharata. A family line of which he- Aristanemi- was no less a part of. He was the son of Shala and grandson of Sunahotra- a living regent of Kashi. Was this Aristanemi’s purpose in life then- to live out his responsibility as a member of the janapada? He considered his nephew anew, looking at him in a way he had never before.

The scion nodded at the captive, understanding more from the statement than he let on. “Run to that master then,” Ketumana said. “Tell him that the line of Kashi stands strong. And soon, Puru soldier, we will stand next to the line of Prayaga as one janapada.”

The Puru soldier backed up with uncertain eyes, expecting death at any moment. It did not come, for uparajan Ketumana had made his declaration clear. The soldier was allowed to leave unaccosted, and a week later he would deliver his message to Hastina Puru. The intent behind his missive was clear- the Bharata janapada was ready.

