---
title: prologue
id: 0
---


There hadn’t been such consternation among the Vedantins since the Great Genocide and the consequent Fleeing.  In the thousands of years since then they had evolved and moved on, even as the grief of near extinction became racial memory, one that evoked primeval and instinctual fear.  There was no hate in their biomechanical hearts for the species that had nearly wiped them out, instead there was fear.  They wanted nothing to do with those invaders anymore, and they had severed nearly all their ties with the past to achieve that.  

So when the silent messages travelled across their generation ships, that the Eternalship was calling a meeting, every Vedantin immediately knew that something was up.  The last time the Eternalship had met, the invaders were already in orbit- ready to obliterate them.  Comm channels that hadn’t been used for millennia crackled with static again, these were the direct links between the generation ships and the Eternal Hall on 'Vautuk'- the first and most populous generation ship.  In these many ships Vedantins of all ages huddled over hi res displays, watching their leadership sit in counsel for the first time since the Great Genocide and the consequent Fleeing.

They sat in concentric circles, the leaders.  In the innermost circle and sitting the highest, for none could sit higher than an Eternal, the Six Eternals.  There was Ela- Eternal of Life and Being, to her left her brother Ral- Eternal of Secrecy and Esotericism.  To his left their cousin Uru- Eternal of Devices and Knowledge.  To the right of Ela was Othra- Eternal of Creation and Thought, and to Othra’s right was Kapp- Eternal Servant.  Sitting in this perfect circle, yet somehow distanced from the rest was Vau- Eternal of Death and Destruction.  His ship was the 'Vautuk'; the Vedantins’ most prized and prided generation ship.  Inside its protective hull, the first survivors had fled the Great Genocide- the 'Vautuk 'was the lead ship of the Fleeing.  That prestigious position it held in the Vedantin history was now locked there by the inertia of Vedantin society.  Even as far more advanced generation ships and battleships had been constructed, the 'Vautuk 'remained the center of the Vedantin fleet, indeed the whole civilization.  

In the circle outside that were seated the Thas- sisters, brothers, uncles, fathers, and mothers to the Eternals.  They were the Eternalship’s counsel, and they held the wisdom of the Vedantin species before the Great Genocide, back when it called itself Antak.  Among them was Pritha, twin of Vau and the most feared Vedantin war commander.  Pritha’s battleship, the 'Prithatuk', was the epitome of Vedantin engineering and technology.  That he had abandoned the proud halls of that ship to sit by his brother on the 'Vautuk 'was indication that something had stirred the Vedantin species once more.

In the outermost circle sat the Tukis- offspring of the Eternals.  Eldest among them was Vak, son of Vau.  He was surrounded by his many cousins- Yak, Ahik, Noara, Oara, Balka, Komi, Uruva, Kak, and many more.  They were the crown princes and princesses of the Vedantin Empire, an empire that was forever hiding from its ancient killers in hulking generation ships that was its home.  None of the Tukis had ever felt ground beneath their feet, or air on their faces.  

“I completely fail to see,” countered Ral, “why we even consider this matter.  To this day we are afraid of using faster than light technology, fearing that the Prakas will find us and kill us down once again.  Why then is it pertinent that we interfere here?”  Ral voiced not his own concerns but those of the entire Vedantin species.  Thousands of years ago they had exiled themselves in these generation ships to the cold, lost corners of space.  Why should they now return towards the warm but hostile inner galaxies?

“I agree,” joined Vau, and all heads turned to him.  This was the unspoken leader of the species.  When the Great Genocide had begun, it was Vau who had rallied survivors and herded them into his ship.  It was Vau again who managed to break free of the war zone and escape into cold, empty space.  When the shock and immobility of the genocide and near extinction had set it, it was Vau yet again who had galvanized the broken species into action and organization.  When Vau spoke, every Vedantin listened.  In these parts of space, where there was no sentient life for light years at end, Vau was God.

“Present your case, Tukis.”  Vau said.  There was no need for him to include the inflection of a command in his voice.  Whatever Vau said was obeyed, unfailingly and without question.  

The Tukis looked among themselves, as if to silently appoint a spokesman.  At this 3rd rung of the Vedantin leadership, hierarchies and roles were less clearly defined.  The twins Vak and Yak were the eldest and sons of Vau no less, but at the 3rd rung that translated into very little authority.  The Tukis were all equal, and titles like ‘eldest’ were nominal at best.  Finally, after a long while, Yak stood up.  Even at his height he could barely see above the seat Thas’ heads, let alone stare at the Eternals face to face.  Such was the architecture of the Eternal Hall- you were psychologically, physically, and symbolically lower than the Eternals. 

“Fathers and Mothers Eternal, Uncles and Aunts Tha,” Yak began with the practiced skill of an orator, his voice smooth and even.  “Let us look back together through the tides of history.”  He waved his hand and immediately the Eternal Hall bustled with vivid swathes of light.  A fourth circle was formed outside the 3rd rung, a circle of visual, 3D display.  Images whirled past in this display at astonishing speeds- the display was racing back in time.  After a while it slowed down before coming to a perfect halt.  The fourth circle was still again, and a single image panned across it.  Yak didn’t need to explain, he knew that the Eternals and Thas would easily keep up with the thread of logic he was planning to establish.  Locking the display at that particular image had been a smart tactical move.  It was an image that was burned across the memory of every Vedantin, so profound was it implication.  

The image was that of Swaraka, the almost mythical home planet of the Vedantin species back when it was called Antak.  But it captured Swaraka at the time of its doom- when it was surrounded by swarms of Praka warships guided by a hive intelligence bent only on the total genocide of the Antak species.  Yak allowed the image to sink in, and he knew that in that time the Eternals and Thas would be flooded by memories of grief and horror.  

“We Tukis are fortunate,” conceded Yak, “that we didn’t have to witness this ancient genocide of our forefathers.  We are fortunate that we didn’t have to flee in clumsily put together generation ships, turning on the FTL drives without any calculated targets.  But that also gives us a perspective that the original survivors such as you might find hard to see at first.”  

Again Yak waited for his listeners to absorb and digest before continuing.  “This image that we see is first and foremost an image of a species at the brink of extinction.  Its home planet surrounded by alien invaders, the outer territories already lost trying to save the mother planet.  But look again, what else do we see?  What other implications does this image hold?”

“I plead to you, Yak,” interrupted Kapp, Eternal Servant and eternal impatient.  “Do not lead us around, get to the point.”

“The point I try to make, father Kapp, is that another perspective on this image can help see why it is important that we return to the inner galaxies.  The image is not simply of genocide and invasion, it is an image of two cousin species going to war- species that evolved from a common ancestor.  Even before the Great Genocide the Antaks and the Prakas had long separated genetically, but their common humanoid ancestry was testament to the Great Ancestors who spawned these two species.”

As Yak talked the display in the 4th circle began moving through images (or time) again, and the Hall was bathed in swathes and blurs of light again.  Half shadows and half images flashed across the faces of the Vedantin leaders in a random, incoherent pattern.  After another while the display stopped again, this time at an image of a single ship drifting in black space.

“It was the Great Ancestors who were the first humanoids to discover space flight.  Millennia after they had fled their dying home in ships like this their evolution gave way to the two separate strands we know as Praka and Antak.  Then they died out, or so we thought.”

Observing silently, Vak watched his younger twin take control of the Eternalship’s nerve.  He was prodding them, teasing them and taunting them, all the while grieving them with memories of the past- softening them up.  Vak felt vaguely resentful towards his twin.  He shared with his siblings the adolescent resentment against the Eternals’ ever present authority.  But nothing outmatched his love, respect, and awe for his father- Vau.  The same respect and awe were now absent in Yak, in the way he spoke to the Eternals.  Yak waited for the Eternals to respond, but this was merely to give the appearance of courtesy- he knew well that they were too tongue tied to say anything.

“Deep in the warmth of inner space, in the galaxy our forefathers called the River of Aether, humanity has been found again- in its pure form!  On a planet the Prakas have name Thea, they have found a species just like the Great Ancestors.  We cannot let this moment in history pass us by.  We must interfere.”

“The matter isn’t so easily moral, Yak,” entered Othra, eldest among the Eternals.  “Your claims are based on the assumption that 'we 'are also humanoid.  But after thousands of years of regressive evolution, how true is that?  Is there a real basis for this apparent kinship you feel towards the primitive humans on an unknown planet?”

The display in the 4th circle began flashing images again, and Yak heard a suppressed groan of pain from one of the elderly Thas.  In a leadership headed by Eternals and apprenticed by their children, the Thas were weirdly out of place.  Certainly, the more aged among them were surreally disconnected from reality now, unperturbed by common day decisions and wishing only to spend the rest of their lives in peace.  Some flashes and shadows later the display settled on an image of an ancient religious site- a Great Ancestor burial ground.  On the dirt layered surface of this archaic cemetery a human finger had run across the dirt, making intricate drawings that told a story in panels.  The first panel showed a solitary ship leaving a single planet.  The second panel showed many ships leaving the same panel.  This was an account of the Great Ancestors’ journey from their planet to the stars they had always dreamed of conquering.  The third panel was more interesting- it showed many ships hovering over another planet, and this time the ancient artist of these panels had placed a single seed right between the ships and the planet.  The next and last panel showed many ships over many planets, with similar seeds between them.  

“Can you piece together this amazing story?  The Great Ancestors flew out from their home planet to the stars.  Across the galaxy they seeded planets with life; the Great Ancestors came to inhabit hundreds of planets.  Where have we ever found concrete facts that they died out?  The story of their evolution into Praka and Antak and consequent extinction is one we have always taken at face value- always accepting it, never questioning it.  But, venerated Eternalship, I ask you.  Is it not possible that in some pockets of space the Great Ancestors still survive, or more likely their further evolved descendants?  Is it not possible that there exists a fifth strand of humanity?”

“'Fifth 'strand?”  Repeated Vau.

Yak nodded at his father.  “Indeed.  The first strand was the Great Ancestors themselves.  The second and third strands were their descendants- Prakas and Antaks.  We Vedantins, survivors and descendants of the Antaks, are the fourth strand- even though we are far more nanobotic and mechanical than any strand before us.  Then the humans found in the River of Aether must surely be the fifth strand.”

It was at this point that Eternal Uru decided to speak up.  Calmly he stated, “The Great Ancestors speciated on their home planet from less complex organisms.  These humanoids the Prakas have discovered in the River of Aether could have evolved similarly isolated and independent.”  Eternal of Devices and Knowledge, Uru was the first word on knowledge and fact among the Vedantin.  Even the other Eternals deferred to him on matters so cleanly within his realm.

“Two humanoid strains evolving separately in the same galaxy is quite unlikely, father Uru,” countered Yak.  “If the Prakas had found these humans in another galaxy, we might not be having this meeting.  But they found them in the heat of the universe, in the same galaxy that the Great Ancestors had first flown out of.  A galaxy that was then long forgotten, and reduced to a mere footnote in the great intergalactic maps that Prakas and Antaks had created.”

Getting increasingly restless, Kapp interrupted again.  “An academic matter at best, Yak.  Even if we were to agree that the humans the Prakas have discovered as relatives of the Great Ancestors, what good does that do to us?  How do we interfere, and in what capacity?  How do we even reach there?  Surely you do not suggest using FTL drives to speed back into the center of the universe, where malevolent Prakas still wait to weed out the last of the Antaks?  In any case, throwing open even a single FTL switch will alert the Prakas, and they will come hunting again.  No distant relative species of ours is worth that risk.”

Yak smiled, unable to hide the triumphant look on his face.  “You are absolutely right, father Kapp.  Going to this planet physically is an impossibility.  We cannot use FTL drives, for that would alert the Prakas.  And using current technology it would be generations before we would even reach the brim of that galaxy.  But there is another way.”

Involuntarily the Eternals and the Thas leaned forward in their elevated seats of nanomesh cushions.  Yak the orator gave a pause sufficiently long enough.  “Through ordinary human birth on their planet- Thea.”

“Ordinary human birth?”  Repeated Vau.  “You talk of magic and sorcery now, son.”

Silently, Yak looked at Ral- Eternal of Secrecy and Esotericism.  He may have imagined it, but the Eternal appeared to shift uncomfortably in his seat.

“Father Ral is far more versed with mystic technologies than any of us could be.  He has seen deeper into the esoteric knowledge of the Great Ancestors than anyone.  He may better tell us, magic or not, is it possible?”

Ral glanced at Vau, almost as if for his approval, before nodding ever so slowly.  In typical eloquent fashion Yak summed up the case, and the Eternals went to vote.  Vau, Ela, Ral, and Uru voted in favour of the Tukis.  And so many millennia before present time, Vau’s sons Vak and Yak took human birth on Thea.  But moments after they had stepped through the Forbidden Gate, that corridor of esoteric space time that Ral had created on his ship, Vau turned to his brother and war commander, Pritha.  

“Go to Thea, my brother.  It will be many generations before you finally reach there, and maybe it is a folly to send my best ship and commander deep into Prakan territory, but my love for my sons overpowers me.  I cannot bear the thought of them, alone, in the inner galaxies- where the Empire of the Praka is strong and dense.  Protect them, and help them in whatever they do.”
