---
title: vedantin
id: 5
---

Vau looked out the window of his bunk.  In the vastness of space, the stars always seemed still, no matter how fast your ship might be going.  Above him, his sister Vakinya stirred in her sleep.  He gathered his robe about him and decided to go for a walk.  As they had approached closer, his sleep had become growingly restless.  He was worried with grim and morbid visions of the approaching future.  The decisions they all had so determinedly made many years ago now seemed full of holes and doubts.

Vau was the commander of the Vedantin generation ship 'Trikarsus'.  Millennia ago, when the Prakas had defeated the Antas, the survivors had fled in generation ships to lost corners of space.  Over succeeding generations these survivors artificially evolved into the Vedantins, the modern descendants of the ancient Antas.  The 'Trikarsus 'was not one of the original generation ships however; it had been built only a few centuries ago, on one of the many secret Vedantin construction stations that orbit hidden planets.  The Prakas were of course, unaware of their existence.  But all that was about to change soon.  

Only a few hours ago, Vau had received news that his agents on Thea had succeeded in carrying out the first stages of the plan.  Not that the Vedantins had always been cautious and hidden.  A few millennia ago, some Vedantins were indeed on Thea, battling alongside with the Tritha Twins.  These then went into hiding, sleeper agents ready to stand again when needed.  The Prakas had noticed, for sure, but did they suspect that the Vedantin was once the Anta?  

The second stage of the plan was much less subtle.  ‘Generation ship’ was the traditional title for ships like the 'Trikarsus', which came from a family of ships the Vedantins built for battle against the Prakas.  The 'Trikarsus 'carried Vau’s entire command, which was not less than eighty million men and women strong- capturing more than three thousand Vedantin battalions.  That was not to speak of the tens of thousands of Vedantin fliers and diggers at his disposal.  Despite being more than five millennia separated from his ancient fathers, the Antas, Vau couldn’t help but feel a heavy pang of sadness whenever he thought of their eventual fate.

By Thean count, and that was the count ships like the 'Trikarsus 'went by, it was now 6400 years ago that the Prakas betrayed their cousins, the Antas, all but obliterating them.  For more than 10,000 years before that, the two species had lived in peaceful and harmonious coexistence.  And then the Prakas discovered Thea, and sought to turn it into a monstrosity.  The Antas tried to stop them, and for that they were destroyed in a horrific act of betrayal.  The Anta homeworlds were bombared with Prakan weapons of destruction that the Antas didn’t even know existed.  Antan battleships across the galaxies were hunted down and crippled, their survivors left to die in the loneliness of space.  Vau, an Antan ‘Eternal’, from who this Vau the commander got his name, was beheaded and his headless body is said to be displayed in the ghastly victory halls of the Prakas even today- a sadistic memorial of a gruesome species-betrayal.  The survivors went into hiding, their fate to be forever bound to their generation ships, for the Praka hunting ships still roamed the galaxies.  Artifically, they removed the genetic markers that made them Anta.  Painfully mourning for the immense loss of their species, they destroyed everything about them that made them similar to the Antas, so great was their need to hide.  

A few generations later, young voices arose among the Vedantin, voices that called for vengeance and battle.  The Elders counselled patience and prudence, but some voices were not to be calmed.  Vau, this Vau- for the original Vau was beheaded long ago, found himself compelled by the rhetoric of the younger ones.  He gave in, and agents were sent to that ancient battleground Thea.  The decision was passed, and Vau sent his king-brother Pritha to engage Thea and assess the strength of the Prakas.  When the reports came back, it was clear to Vau that Thea was where the first attack had to be.  Thea was where the Vedantin would announce to the Praka that he was here, and that retribution would be his.  

So Vau sent his generals, the strongest and mightiest commanders of his armies.  Using the assumed powers of his original namesake, he called upon the ancient Vau’s immortal army- the Vaunaki.  But most importantly, and most painfully, he sent his sons Vak and Yak.  Proud they had made him, their deeds already legends not only among the Vedantin but also among those humans on Thea.  Surely the Prakas had noticed, surely the Prakas knew.

And now, two millennia after he had tearfully allowed his sons to take the mystical paths that led to human birth on Thea, Vau led the 'Trikarsus 'across space for the first of the Vedantin attack on Thea.  Their objective was simple, Thea had to be destroyed.  It stood for everything that was Prakan, and everything that was Prakan simply must go- for that was a Vedantin’s eternal species-vow.   
